Title:  Project Gutenberg's The Three Musketeers, by Alexandre Dumas [Pere]
Title:  #2 in our series by Alexandre Dumas [Pere]
Title:  
Title:  Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
Title:  copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
Title:  this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.
Title:  
Title:  This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Title:  Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
Title:  header without written permission.
Title:  
Title:  Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
Title:  eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
Title:  important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
Title:  how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
Title:  donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  **Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**
Title:  
Title:  **eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**
Title:  
Title:  *****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Title: The Three Musketeers
Title:  
Title:  Author: Alexandre Dumas [Pere]
Title:  
Title:  Release Date: March, 1998 [EBook #1257]
Title:  [This file was last updated on June 13, 2006]
Title:  
Title:  Edition: 12
Title:  
Title:  Language: English
Title:  
Title:  Character set encoding: ASCII
Title:  
Title:  *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THREE MUSKETEERS ***
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Typed By:
Title:  John P. Roberts III
Title:  Roger Labbe
Title:  Scott David Gray
Title:  Sue Asscher
Title:  Anita Martin
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The Three Musketeers
Title:  Alexandre Dumas
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Typed By:
Title:  John P. Roberts III
Title:  Roger Labbe
Title:  Scott David Gray
Title:  Sue Asscher
Title:  Anita Martin
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The Three Musketeers
Title:  Alexandre Dumas
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Contents
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Author's Preface
Title:  
Title:  1.  THE THREE PRESENTS OF D'ARTAGNAN THE ELDER
Title:  2.  THE ANTECHAMBER OF M. DE TREVILLE
Title:  3.  THE AUDIENCE
Title:  4.  THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THE
Title:      HANDKERCHIEF OF ARAMIS
Title:  5.  THE KING'S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL'S GUARDS
Title:  6.  HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XIII
Title:  7.  THE INTERIOR OF "THE MUSKETEERS"
Title:  8.  CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE
Title:  9.  D'ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF
Title:  10. A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
Title:  11. IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS
Title:  12. GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
Title:  13. MONSIEUR BONACIEUX
Title:  14. THE MAN OF MEUNG
Title:  15. MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD
Title:  16. M. SEGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THAN ONCE FOR THE BELL,
Title:      IN ORDER TO RING IT, AS HE DID BEFORE
Title:  17. BONACIEUX AT HOME
Title:  18. LOVER AND HUSBAND
Title:  19. PLAN OF CAMPAIGN
Title:  20. THE JOURNEY
Title:  21. THE COUNTESS DE WINTER
Title:  22. THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON
Title:  23. THE RENDEZVOUS
Title:  24. THE PAVILION
Title:  25. PORTHOS
Title:  26. ARAMIS AND HIS THESIS
Title:  27. THE WIFE OF ATHOS
Title:  28. THE RETURN
Title:  29. HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS
Title:  30. D'ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN
Title:  31. ENGLISH AND FRENCH
Title:  32. A PROCURATOR'S DINNER
Title:  33. SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS
Title:  34. IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF
Title:  35. A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID
Title:  36. DREAM OF VENGEANCE
Title:  37. MILADY'S SECRET
Title:  38. HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMODING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURED HIS EQUIPMENT
Title:  39. A VISION
Title:  40. A TERRIBLE VISION
Title:  41. THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE
Title:  42. THE ANJOU WINE
Title:  43. THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT
Title:  44. THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES
Title:  45. A CONJUGAL SCENE
Title:  46. THE BASTION SAINT-GERVAIS
Title:  47. THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS
Title:  48. A FAMILY AFFAIR
Title:  49. FATALITY
Title:  50. CHAT BETWEEN BROTHER AND SISTER
Title:  51. OFFICER
Title:  52. CAPTIVITY:  THE FIRST DAY
Title:  53. CAPTIVITY:  THE SECOND DAY
Title:  54. CAPTIVITY:  THE THIRD DAY
Title:  55. CAPTIVITY:  THE FOURTH DAY
Title:  56. CAPTIVITY:  THE FIFTH DAY
Title:  57. MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY
Title:  58. ESCAPE
Title:  59. WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH
Title:  60. IN FRANCE
Title:  61. THE CARMELITE CONVENT AT BETHUNE
Title:  62. TWO VARIETIES OF DEMONS
Title:  63. THE DROP OF WATER
Title:  64. THE MAN IN THE RED CLOAK
Title:  65. TRIAL
Title:  66. EXECUTION
Title:  67. CONCLUSION
Title:  
Title:  EPILOGUE
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The Three Musketeers
Title:  Alexandre Dumas
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  AUTHOR'S PREFACE
Title:  
Title:  In which it is proved that, notwithstanding their names' ending
Title:  in OS and IS, the heroes of the story which we are about to have
Title:  the honor to relate to our readers have nothing mythological
Title:  about them.
Title:  
Title:  A short time ago, while making researches in the Royal Library
Title:  for my History of Louis XIV, I stumbled by chance upon the
Title:  Memoirs of M. d'Artagnan, printed--as were most of the works of
Title:  that period, in which authors could not tell the truth without
Title:  the risk of a residence, more or less long, in the Bastille--at
Title:  Amsterdam, by Pierre Rouge.  The title attracted me; I took them
Title:  home with me, with the permission of the guardian, and devoured
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  It is not my intention here to enter into an analysis of this
Title:  curious work; and I shall satisfy myself with referring such of
Title:  my readers as appreciate the pictures of the period to its pages.
Title:  They will therein find portraits penciled by the hand of a
Title:  master; and although these squibs may be, for the most part,
Title:  traced upon the doors of barracks and the walls of cabarets, they
Title:  will not find the likenesses of Louis XIII, Anne of Austria,
Title:  Richelieu, Mazarin, and the courtiers of the period, less
Title:  faithful than in the history of M. Anquetil.
Title:  
Title:  But, it is well known, what strikes the capricious mind of the
Title:  poet is not always what affects the mass of readers.  Now, while
Title:  admiring, as others doubtless will admire, the details we have to
Title:  relate, our main preoccupation concerned a matter to which no one
Title:  before ourselves had given a thought.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan relates that on his first visit to M. de Treville,
Title:  captain of the king's Musketeers, he met in the antechamber three
Title:  young men, serving in the illustrious corps into which he was
Title:  soliciting the honor of being received, bearing the names of
Title:  Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  We must confess these three strange names struck us; and it
Title:  immediately occurred to us that they were but pseudonyms, under
Title:  which d'Artagnan had disguised names perhaps illustrious, or else
Title:  that the bearers of these borrowed names had themselves chosen
Title:  them on the day in which, from caprice, discontent, or want of
Title:  fortune, they had donned the simple Musketeer's uniform.
Title:  
Title:  From the moment we had no rest till we could find some trace in
Title:  contemporary works of these extraordinary names which had so
Title:  strongly awakened our curiosity.
Title:  
Title:  The catalogue alone of the books we read with this object would
Title:  fill a whole chapter, which, although it might be very
Title:  instructive, would certainly afford our readers but little
Title:  amusement.  It will suffice, then, to tell them that at the
Title:  moment at which, discouraged by so many fruitless investigations,
Title:  we were about to abandon our search, we at length found, guided
Title:  by the counsels of our illustrious friend Paulin Paris, a
Title:  manuscript in folio, endorsed 4772 or 4773, we do not recollect
Title:  which, having for title, "Memoirs of the Comte de la Fere,
Title:  Touching Some Events Which Passed in France Toward the End of the
Title:  Reign of King Louis XIII and the Commencement of the Reign of
Title:  King Louis XIV."
Title:  
Title:  It may be easily imagined how great was our joy when, in turning
Title:  over this manuscript, our last hope, we found at the twentieth
Title:  page the name of Athos, at the twenty-seventh the name of
Title:  Porthos, and at the thirty-first the name of Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  The discovery of a completely unknown manuscript at a period in
Title:  which historical science is carried to such a high degree
Title:  appeared almost miraculous.  We hastened, therefore, to obtain
Title:  permission to print it, with the view of presenting ourselves
Title:  someday with the pack of others at the doors of the Academie des
Title:  Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, if we should not succeed--a very
Title:  probable thing, by the by--in gaining admission to the Academie
Title:  Francaise with our own proper pack.  This permission, we feel
Title:  bound to say, was graciously granted; which compels us here to
Title:  give a public contradiction to the slanderers who pretend that we
Title:  live under a government but moderately indulgent to men of
Title:  letters.
Title:  
Title:  Now, this is the first part of this precious manuscript which we
Title:  offer to our readers, restoring it to the title which belongs to
Title:  it, and entering into an engagement that if (of which we have no
Title:  doubt) this first part should obtain the success it merits, we
Title:  will publish the second immediately.
Title:  
Title:  In the meanwhile, as the godfather is a second father, we beg the
Title:  reader to lay to our account, and not to that of the Comte de la
Title:  Fere, the pleasure or the ENNUI he may experience.
Title:  
Title:  This being understood, let us proceed with our history.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  1  THE THREE PRESENTS OF D'ARTAGNAN THE ELDER
Title:  
Title:  On the first Monday of the month of April, 1625, the market town
Title:  of Meung, in which the author of ROMANCE OF THE ROSE was born,
Title:  appeared to be in as perfect a state of revolution as if the
Title:  Huguenots had just made a second La Rochelle of it.  Many
Title:  citizens, seeing the women flying toward the High Street, leaving
Title:  their children crying at the open doors, hastened to don the
Title:  cuirass, and supporting their somewhat uncertain courage with a
Title:  musket or a partisan, directed their steps toward the hostelry of
Title:  the Jolly Miller, before which was gathered, increasing every
Title:  minute, a compact group, vociferous and full of curiosity.
Title:  
Title:  In those times panics were common, and few days passed without
Title:  some city or other registering in its archives an event of this
Title:  kind.  There were nobles, who made war against each other; there
Title:  was the king, who made war against the cardinal; there was Spain,
Title:  which made war against the king.  Then, in addition to these
Title:  concealed or public, secret or open wars, there were robbers,
Title:  mendicants, Huguenots, wolves, and scoundrels, who made war upon
Title:  everybody.  The citizens always took up arms readily against
Title:  thieves, wolves or scoundrels, often against nobles or Huguenots,
Title:  sometimes against the king, but never against cardinal or Spain.
Title:  It resulted, then, from this habit that on the said first Monday
Title:  of April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and seeing
Title:  neither the red-and-yellow standard nor the livery of the Duc de
Title:  Richelieu, rushed toward the hostel of the Jolly Miller.  When
Title:  arrived there, the cause of the hubbub was apparent to all.
Title:  
Title:  A young man--we can sketch his portrait at a dash.  Imagine to
Title:  yourself a Don Quixote of eighteen; a Don Quixote without his
Title:  corselet, without his coat of mail, without his cuisses; a Don
Title:  Quixote clothed in a woolen doublet, the blue color of which had
Title:  faded into a nameless shade between lees of wine and a heavenly
Title:  azure; face long and brown; high cheek bones, a sign of sagacity;
Title:  the maxillary muscles enormously developed, an infallible sign by
Title:  which a Gascon may always be detected, even without his cap--and
Title:  our young man wore a cap set off with a sort of feather; the eye
Title:  open and intelligent; the nose hooked, but finely chiseled.  Too
Title:  big for a youth, too small for a grown man, an experienced eye
Title:  might have taken him for a farmer's son upon a journey had it not
Title:  been for the long sword which, dangling from a leather baldric,
Title:  hit against the calves of its owner as he walked, and against the
Title:  rough side of his steed when he was on horseback.
Title:  
Title:  For our young man had a steed which was the observed of all
Title:  observers.  It was a Bearn pony, from twelve to fourteen years
Title:  old, yellow in his hide, without a hair in his tail, but not
Title:  without windgalls on his legs, which, though going with his head
Title:  lower than his knees, rendering a martingale quite unnecessary,
Title:  contrived nevertheless to perform his eight leagues a day.
Title:  Unfortunately, the qualities of this horse were so well concealed
Title:  under his strange-colored hide and his unaccountable gait, that
Title:  at a time when everybody was a connoisseur in horseflesh, the
Title:  appearance of the aforesaid pony at Meung--which place he had
Title:  entered about a quarter of an hour before, by the gate of
Title:  Beaugency--produced an unfavorable feeling, which extended to his
Title:  rider.
Title:  
Title:  And this feeling had been more painfully perceived by young
Title:  d'Artagnan--for so was the Don Quixote of this second Rosinante
Title:  named--from his not being able to conceal from himself the
Title:  ridiculous appearance that such a steed gave him, good horseman
Title:  as he was.  He had sighed deeply, therefore, when accepting the
Title:  gift of the pony from M. d'Artagnan the elder.  He was not
Title:  ignorant that such a beast was worth at least twenty livres; and
Title:  the words which had accompanied the present were above all price.
Title:  
Title:  "My son," said the old Gascon gentleman, in that pure Bearn
Title:  PATOIS of which Henry IV could never rid himself, "this horse was
Title:  born in the house of your father about thirteen years ago, and
Title:  has remained in it ever since, which ought to make you love it.
Title:  Never sell it; allow it to die tranquilly and honorably of old
Title:  age, and if you make a campaign with it, take as much care of it
Title:  as you would of an old servant.  At court, provided you have ever
Title:  the honor to go there," continued M. d'Artagnan the elder, "--an
Title:  honor to which, remember, your ancient nobility gives you the
Title:  right--sustain worthily your name of gentleman, which has been
Title:  worthily borne by your ancestors for five hundred years, both for
Title:  your own sake and the sake of those who belong to you.  By the
Title:  latter I mean your relatives and friends.  Endure nothing from
Title:  anyone except Monsieur the Cardinal and the king.  It is by his
Title:  courage, please observe, by his courage alone, that a gentleman
Title:  can make his way nowadays.  Whoever hesitates for a second
Title:  perhaps allows the bait to escape which during that exact second
Title:  fortune held out to him.  You are young.  You ought to be brave
Title:  for two reasons:  the first is that you are a Gascon, and the
Title:  second is that you are my son.  Never fear quarrels, but seek
Title:  adventures.  I have taught you how to handle a sword; you have
Title:  thews of iron, a wrist of steel.  Fight on all occasions.  Fight
Title:  the more for duels being forbidden, since consequently there is
Title:  twice as much courage in fighting.  I have nothing to give you,
Title:  my son, but fifteen crowns, my horse, and the counsels you have
Title:  just heard.  Your mother will add to them a recipe for a certain
Title:  balsam, which she had from a Bohemian and which has the
Title:  miraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach the
Title:  heart.  Take advantage of all, and live happily and long.  I have
Title:  but one word to add, and that is to propose an example to you--
Title:  not mine, for I myself have never appeared at court, and have
Title:  only taken part in religious wars as a volunteer; I speak of
Title:  Monsieur de Treville, who was formerly my neighbor, and who had
Title:  the honor to be, as a child, the play-fellow of our king, Louis
Title:  XIII, whom God preserve!  Sometimes their play degenerated into
Title:  battles, and in these battles the king was not always the
Title:  stronger.  The blows which he received increased greatly his
Title:  esteem and friendship for Monsieur de Treville.  Afterward,
Title:  Monsieur de Treville fought with others: in his first journey to
Title:  Paris, five times; from the death of the late king till the young
Title:  one came of age, without reckoning wars and sieges, seven times;
Title:  and from that date up to the present day, a hundred times,
Title:  perhaps!  So that in spite of edicts, ordinances, and decrees,
Title:  there he is, captain of the Musketeers; that is to say, chief of
Title:  a legion of Caesars, whom the king holds in great esteem and whom
Title:  the cardinal dreads--he who dreads nothing, as it is said.  Still
Title:  further, Monsieur de Treville gains ten thousand crowns a year;
Title:  he is therefore a great noble.  He began as you begin.  Go to him
Title:  with this letter, and make him your model in order that you may
Title:  do as he has done."
Title:  
Title:  Upon which M. d'Artagnan the elder girded his own sword round his
Title:  son, kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him his
Title:  benediction.
Title:  
Title:  On leaving the paternal chamber, the young man found his mother,
Title:  who was waiting for him with the famous recipe of which the
Title:  counsels we have just repeated would necessitate frequent
Title:  employment.  The adieux were on this side longer and more tender
Title:  than they had been on the other--not that M. d'Artagnan did not
Title:  love his son, who was his only offspring, but M. d'Artagnan was a
Title:  man, and he would have considered it unworthy of a man to give
Title:  way to his feelings; whereas Mme. d'Artagnan was a woman, and
Title:  still more, a mother.  She wept abundantly; and--let us speak it
Title:  to the praise of M. d'Artagnan the younger--notwithstanding the
Title:  efforts he made to remain firm, as a future Musketeer ought,
Title:  nature prevailed, and he shed many tears, of which he succeeded
Title:  with great difficulty in concealing the half.
Title:  
Title:  The same day the young man set forward on his journey, furnished
Title:  with the three paternal gifts, which consisted, as we have said,
Title:  of fifteen crowns, the horse, and the letter for M. de Treville--
Title:  the counsels being thrown into the bargain.
Title:  
Title:  With such a VADE MECUM d'Artagnan was morally and physically an
Title:  exact copy of the hero of Cervantes, to whom we so happily
Title:  compared him when our duty of an historian placed us under the
Title:  necessity of sketching his portrait.  Don Quixote took windmills
Title:  for giants, and sheep for armies; d'Artagnan took every smile for
Title:  an insult, and every look as a provocation--whence it resulted
Title:  that from Tarbes to Meung his fist was constantly doubled, or his
Title:  hand on the hilt of his sword; and yet the fist did not descend
Title:  upon any jaw, nor did the sword issue from its scabbard.  It was
Title:  not that the sight of the wretched pony did not excite numerous
Title:  smiles on the countenances of passers-by; but as against the side
Title:  of this pony rattled a sword of respectable length, and as over
Title:  this sword gleamed an eye rather ferocious than haughty, these
Title:  passers-by repressed their hilarity, or if hilarity prevailed
Title:  over prudence, they endeavored to laugh only on one side, like
Title:  the masks of the ancients.  D'Artagnan, then, remained majestic
Title:  and intact in his susceptibility, till he came to this unlucky
Title:  city of Meung.
Title:  
Title:  But there, as he was alighting from his horse at the gate of the
Title:  Jolly Miller, without anyone--host, waiter, or hostler--coming to
Title:  hold his stirrup or take his horse, d'Artagnan spied, though an
Title:  open window on the ground floor, a gentleman, well-made and of
Title:  good carriage, although of rather a stern countenance, talking
Title:  with two persons who appeared to listen to him with respect.
Title:  d'Artagnan fancied quite naturally, according to his custom, that
Title:  he must be the object of their conversation, and listened.  This
Title:  time d'Artagnan was only in part mistaken; he himself was not in
Title:  question, but his horse was. The gentleman appeared to be
Title:  enumerating all his qualities to his auditors; and, as I have
Title:  said, the auditors seeming to have great deference for the
Title:  narrator, they every moment burst into fits of laughter.  Now, as
Title:  a half-smile was sufficient to awaken the irascibility of the
Title:  young man, the effect produced upon him by this vociferous mirth
Title:  may be easily imagined.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, d'Artagnan was desirous of examining the appearance
Title:  of this impertinent personage who ridiculed him.  He fixed his
Title:  haughty eye upon the stranger, and perceived a man of from forty
Title:  to forty-five years of age, with black and piercing eyes, pale
Title:  complexion, a strongly marked nose, and a black and well-shaped
Title:  mustache.  He was dressed in a doublet and hose of a violet
Title:  color, with aiguillettes of the same color, without any other
Title:  ornaments than the customary slashes, through which the shirt
Title:  appeared.  This doublet and hose, though new, were creased, like
Title:  traveling clothes for a long time packed in a portmanteau.
Title:  d'Artagnan made all these remarks with the rapidity of a most
Title:  minute observer, and doubtless from an instinctive feeling that
Title:  this stranger was destined to have a great influence over his
Title:  future life.
Title:  
Title:  Now, as at the moment in which d'Artagnan fixed his eyes upon the
Title:  gentleman in the violet doublet, the gentleman made one of his
Title:  most knowing and profound remarks respecting the Bearnese pony,
Title:  his two auditors laughed even louder than before, and he himself,
Title:  though contrary to his custom, allowed a pale smile (if I may
Title:  allowed to use such an expression) to stray over his countenance.
Title:  This time there could be no doubt; d'Artagnan was really
Title:  insulted.  Full, then, of this conviction, he pulled his cap down
Title:  over his eyes, and endeavoring to copy some of the court airs he
Title:  had picked up in Gascony among young traveling nobles, he
Title:  advanced with one hand on the hilt of his sword and the other
Title:  resting on his hip.  Unfortunately, as he advanced, his anger
Title:  increased at every step; and instead of the proper and lofty
Title:  speech he had prepared as a prelude to his challenge, he found
Title:  nothing at the tip of his tongue but a gross personality, which
Title:  he accompanied with a furious gesture.
Title:  
Title:  "I say, sir, you sir, who are hiding yourself behind that
Title:  shutter--yes, you, sir, tell me what you are laughing at, and we
Title:  will laugh together!"
Title:  
Title:  The gentleman raised his eyes slowly from the nag to his
Title:  cavalier, as if he required some time to ascertain whether it
Title:  could be to him that such strange reproaches were addressed;
Title:  then, when he could not possibly entertain any doubt of the
Title:  matter, his eyebrows slightly bent, and with an accent of irony
Title:  and insolence impossible to be described, he replied to
Title:  d'Artagnan, "I was not speaking to you, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "But I am speaking to you!" replied the young man, additionally
Title:  exasperated with this mixture of insolence and good manners, of
Title:  politeness and scorn.
Title:  
Title:  The stranger looked at him again with a slight smile, and
Title:  retiring from the window, came out of the hostelry with a slow
Title:  step, and placed himself before the horse, within two paces of
Title:  d'Artagnan.  His quiet manner and the ironical expression of his
Title:  countenance redoubled the mirth of the persons with whom he had
Title:  been talking, and who still remained at the window.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, seeing him approach, drew his sword a foot out of the
Title:  scabbard.
Title:  
Title:  "This horse is decidedly, or rather has been in his youth, a
Title:  buttercup," resumed the stranger, continuing the remarks he had
Title:  begun, and addressing himself to his auditors at the window,
Title:  without paying the least attention to the exasperation of
Title:  d'Artagnan, who, however placed himself between him and them.
Title:  "It is a color very well known in botany, but till the present
Title:  time very rare among horses."
Title:  
Title:  "There are people who laugh at the horse that would not dare to
Title:  laugh at the master," cried the young emulator of the furious
Title:  Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "I do not often laugh, sir," replied the stranger, "as you may
Title:  perceive by the expression of my countenance; but nevertheless I
Title:  retain the privilege of laughing when I please."
Title:  
Title:  "And I," cried d'Artagnan, "will allow no man to laugh when it
Title:  displeases me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed, sir," continued the stranger, more calm than ever;
Title:  "well, that is perfectly right!" and turning on his heel, was
Title:  about to re-enter the hostelry by the front gate, beneath which
Title:  d'Artagnan on arriving had observed a saddled horse.
Title:  
Title:  But, d'Artagnan was not of a character to allow a man to escape
Title:  him thus who had the insolence to ridicule him.  He drew his
Title:  sword entirely from the scabbard, and followed him, crying,
Title:  "Turn, turn, Master Joker, lest I strike you behind!"
Title:  
Title:  "Strike me!" said the other, turning on his heels, and surveying
Title:  the young man with as much astonishment as contempt.  "Why, my
Title:  good fellow, you must be mad!"  Then, in a suppressed tone, as if
Title:  speaking to himself, "This is annoying," continued he.  "What a
Title:  godsend this would be for his Majesty, who is seeking everywhere
Title:  for brave fellows to recruit for his Musketeers!"
Title:  
Title:  He had scarcely finished, when d'Artagnan made such a furious
Title:  lunge at him that if he had not sprung nimbly backward, it is
Title:  probable he would have jested for the last time.  The stranger,
Title:  then perceiving that the matter went beyond raillery, drew his
Title:  sword, saluted his adversary, and seriously placed himself on
Title:  guard.  But at the same moment, his two auditors, accompanied by
Title:  the host, fell upon d'Artagnan with sticks, shovels and tongs.
Title:  This caused so rapid and complete a diversion from the attack
Title:  that d'Artagnan's adversary, while the latter turned round to
Title:  face this shower of blows, sheathed his sword with the same
Title:  precision, and instead of an actor, which he had nearly been,
Title:  became a spectator of the fight--a part in which he acquitted
Title:  himself with his usual impassiveness, muttering, nevertheless, "A
Title:  plague upon these Gascons!  Replace him on his orange horse, and
Title:  let him begone!"
Title:  
Title:  "Not before I have killed you, poltroon!" cried d'Artagnan,
Title:  making the best face possible, and never retreating one step
Title:  before his three assailants, who continued to shower blows upon
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  "Another gasconade!" murmured the gentleman.  "By my honor, these
Title:  Gascons are incorrigible!  Keep up the dance, then, since he will
Title:  have it so.  When he is tired, he will perhaps tell us that he
Title:  has had enough of it."
Title:  
Title:  But the stranger knew not the headstrong personage he had to do
Title:  with; d'Artagnan was not the man ever to cry for quarter.  The
Title:  fight was therefore prolonged for some seconds; but at length
Title:  d'Artagnan dropped his sword, which was broken in two pieces by
Title:  the blow of a stick.  Another blow full upon his forehead at the
Title:  same moment brought him to the ground, covered with blood and
Title:  almost fainting.
Title:  
Title:  It was at this moment that people came flocking to the scene of
Title:  action from all sides.  The host, fearful of consequences, with
Title:  the help of his servants carried the wounded man into the
Title:  kitchen, where some trifling attentions were bestowed upon him.
Title:  
Title:  As to the gentleman, he resumed his place at the window, and
Title:  surveyed the crowd with a certain impatience, evidently annoyed
Title:  by their remaining undispersed.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, how is it with this madman?" exclaimed he, turning round
Title:  as the noise of the door announced the entrance of the host, who
Title:  came in to inquire if he was unhurt.
Title:  
Title:  "Your excellency is safe and sound?" asked the host.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes!  Perfectly safe and sound, my good host; and I wish to
Title:  know what has become of our young man."
Title:  
Title:  "He is better," said the host, "he fainted quite away."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!" said the gentleman.
Title:  
Title:  "But before he fainted, he collected all his strength to
Title:  challenge you, and to defy you while challenging you."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, this fellow must be the devil in person!" cried the
Title:  stranger.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no, your Excellency, he is not the devil," replied the host,
Title:  with a grin of contempt; "for during his fainting we rummaged his
Title:  valise and found nothing but a clean shirt and eleven crowns--
Title:  which however, did not prevent his saying, as he was fainting,
Title:  that if such a thing had happened in Paris, you should have cause
Title:  to repent of it at a later period."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said the stranger coolly, "he must be some prince in
Title:  disguise."
Title:  
Title:  "I have told you this, good sir," resumed the host, "in order
Title:  that you may be on your guard."
Title:  
Title:  "Did he name no one in his passion?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; he struck his pocket and said, 'We shall see what Monsieur
Title:  de Treville will think of this insult offered to his protege.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur de Treville?" said the stranger, becoming attentive,
Title:  "he put his hand upon his pocket while pronouncing the name of
Title:  Monsieur de Treville?  Now, my dear host, while your young man
Title:  was insensible, you did not fail, I am quite sure, to ascertain
Title:  what that pocket contained.  What was there in it?"
Title:  
Title:  "A letter addressed to Monsieur de Treville, captain of the
Title:  Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly as I have the honor to tell your Excellency."
Title:  
Title:  The host, who was not endowed with great perspicacity, did not
Title:  observe the expression which his words had given to the
Title:  physiognomy of the stranger.  The latter rose from the front of
Title:  the window, upon the sill of which he had leaned with his elbow,
Title:  and knitted his brow like a man disquieted.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" murmured he, between his teeth.  "Can Treville have
Title:  set this Gascon upon me?  He is very young; but a sword thrust is
Title:  a sword thrust, whatever be the age of him who gives it, and a
Title:  youth is less to be suspected than an older man," and the
Title:  stranger fell into a reverie which lasted some minutes.  "A weak
Title:  obstacle is sometimes sufficient to overthrow a great design.
Title:  
Title:  "Host," said he, "could you not contrive to get rid of this
Title:  frantic boy for me?  In conscience, I cannot kill him; and yet,"
Title:  added he, with a coldly menacing expression, "he annoys me.
Title:  Where is he?"
Title:  
Title:  "In my wife's chamber, on the first flight, where they are
Title:  dressing his wounds."
Title:  
Title:  "His things and his bag are with him?  Has he taken off his
Title:  doublet?"
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary, everything is in the kitchen.  But if he annoys
Title:  you, this young fool--"
Title:  
Title:  "To be sure he does.  He causes a disturbance in your hostelry,
Title:  which respectable people cannot put up with.  Go; make out my
Title:  bill and notify my servant."
Title:  
Title:  "What, monsieur, will you leave us so soon?"
Title:  
Title:  "You know that very well, as I gave my order to saddle my horse.
Title:  Have they not obeyed me?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is done; as your Excellency may have observed, your horse is
Title:  in the great gateway, ready saddled for your departure."
Title:  
Title:  "That is well; do as I have directed you, then."
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil!" said the host to himself. "Can he be afraid of
Title:  this boy?"  But an imperious glance from the stranger stopped him
Title:  short; he bowed humbly and retired.
Title:  
Title:  "It is not necessary for Milady* to be seen by this fellow,"
Title:  continued the stranger.  "She will soon pass; she is already
Title:  late.  I had better get on horseback, and go and meet her.  I
Title:  should like, however, to know what this letter addressed to
Title:  Treville contains."
Title:  
Title:  *We are well aware that this term, milady, is only properly used
Title:  when followed by a family name.  But we find it thus in the manuscript,
Title:  and we do not choose to take upon ourselves to alter it.
Title:  
Title:  And the stranger, muttering to himself, directed his steps toward
Title:  the kitchen.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, the host, who entertained no doubt that it was
Title:  the presence of the young man that drove the stranger from his
Title:  hostelry, re-ascended to his wife's chamber, and found d'Artagnan
Title:  just recovering his senses.  Giving him to understand that the
Title:  police would deal with him pretty severely for having sought a
Title:  quarrel with a great lord--for the opinion of the host the
Title:  stranger could be nothing less than a great lord--he insisted
Title:  that notwithstanding his weakness d'Artagnan should get up and
Title:  depart as quickly as possible.  D'Artagnan, half stupefied,
Title:  without his doublet, and with his head bound up in a linen cloth,
Title:  arose then, and urged by the host, began to descend the stairs;
Title:  but on arriving at the kitchen, the first thing he saw was his
Title:  antagonist talking calmly at the step of a heavy carriage, drawn
Title:  by two large Norman horses.
Title:  
Title:  His interlocutor, whose head appeared through the carriage
Title:  window, was a woman of from twenty to two-and-twenty years.  We
Title:  have already observed with what rapidity d'Artagnan seized the
Title:  expression of a countenance.  He perceived then, at a glance,
Title:  that this woman was young and beautiful; and her style of beauty
Title:  struck him more forcibly from its being totally different from
Title:  that of the southern countries in which d'Artagnan had hitherto
Title:  resided.  She was pale and fair, with long curls falling in
Title:  profusion over her shoulders, had large, blue, languishing eyes,
Title:  rosy lips, and hands of alabaster.  She was talking with great
Title:  animation with the stranger.
Title:  
Title:  "His Eminence, then, orders me--" said the lady.
Title:  
Title:  "To return instantly to England, and to inform him as soon as the
Title:  duke leaves London."
Title:  
Title:  "And as to my other instructions?" asked the fair traveler.
Title:  
Title:  "They are contained in this box, which you will not open until
Title:  you are on the other side of the Channel."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well; and you--what will you do?"
Title:  
Title:  "I--I return to Paris."
Title:  
Title:  "What, without chastising this insolent boy?" asked the lady.
Title:  
Title:  The stranger was about to reply; but at the moment he opened his
Title:  mouth, d'Artagnan, who had heard all, precipitated himself over
Title:  the threshold of the door.
Title:  
Title:  "This insolent boy chastises others," cried he; "and I hope that
Title:  this time he whom he ought to chastise will not escape him as
Title:  before."
Title:  
Title:  "Will not escape him?" replied the stranger, knitting his brow.
Title:  
Title:  "No; before a woman you would dare not fly, I presume?"
Title:  
Title:  "Remember," said Milady, seeing the stranger lay his hand on his
Title:  sword, "the least delay may ruin everything."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right," cried the gentleman; "begone then, on your part,
Title:  and I will depart as quickly on mine."  And bowing to the lady,
Title:  sprang into his saddle, while her coachman applied his whip
Title:  vigorously to his horses.  The two interlocutors thus separated,
Title:  taking opposite directions, at full gallop.
Title:  
Title:  "Pay him, booby!" cried the stranger to his servant, without
Title:  checking the speed of his horse; and the man, after throwing two
Title:  or three silver pieces at the foot of mine host, galloped after
Title:  his master.
Title:  
Title:  "Base coward! false gentleman!" cried d'Artagnan, springing
Title:  forward, in his turn, after the servant.  But his wound had
Title:  rendered him too weak to support such an exertion.  Scarcely had
Title:  he gone ten steps when his ears began to tingle, a faintness
Title:  seized him, a cloud of blood passed over his eyes, and he fell in
Title:  the middle of the street, crying still, "Coward! coward! coward!"
Title:  
Title:  "He is a coward, indeed," grumbled the host, drawing near to
Title:  d'Artagnan, and endeavoring by this little flattery to make up
Title:  matters with the young man, as the heron of the fable did with
Title:  the snail he had despised the evening before.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, a base coward," murmured d'Artagnan; "but she--she was very
Title:  beautiful."
Title:  
Title:  "What she?" demanded the host.
Title:  
Title:  "Milady," faltered d'Artagnan, and fainted a second time.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, it's all one," said the host; "I have lost two customers,
Title:  but this one remains, of whom I am pretty certain for some days
Title:  to come.  There will be eleven crowns gained."
Title:  
Title:  It is to be remembered that eleven crowns was just the sum that
Title:  remained in d'Artagnan's purse.
Title:  
Title:  The host had reckoned upon eleven days of confinement at a crown
Title:  a day, but he had reckoned without his guest.  On the following
Title:  morning at five o'clock d'Artagnan arose, and descending to the
Title:  kitchen without help, asked, among other ingredients the list of
Title:  which has not come down to us, for some oil, some wine, and some
Title:  rosemary, and with his mother's recipe in his hand composed a
Title:  balsam, with which he anointed his numerous wounds, replacing his
Title:  bandages himself, and positively refusing the assistance of any
Title:  doctor, d'Artagnan walked about that same evening, and was almost
Title:  cured by the morrow.
Title:  
Title:  But when the time came to pay for his rosemary, this oil, and the
Title:  wine, the only expense the master had incurred, as he had
Title:  preserved a strict abstinence--while on the contrary, the yellow
Title:  horse, by the account of the hostler at least, had eaten three
Title:  times as much as a horse of his size could reasonably supposed to
Title:  have done--d'Artagnan found nothing in his pocket but his little
Title:  old velvet purse with the eleven crowns it contained; for as to
Title:  the letter addressed to M. de Treville, it had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  The young man commenced his search for the letter with the
Title:  greatest patience, turning out his pockets of all kinds over and
Title:  over again, rummaging and rerummaging in his valise, and opening
Title:  and reopening his purse; but when he found that he had come to
Title:  the conviction that the letter was not to be found, he flew, for
Title:  the third time, into such a rage as was near costing him a fresh
Title:  consumption of wine, oil, and rosemary--for upon seeing this hot-
Title:  headed youth become exasperated and threaten to destroy
Title:  everything in the establishment if his letter were not found, the
Title:  host seized a spit, his wife a broom handle, and the servants the
Title:  same sticks they had used the day before.
Title:  
Title:  "My letter of recommendation!" cried d'Artagnan, "my letter of
Title:  recommendation! or, the holy blood, I will spit you all like
Title:  ortolans!"
Title:  
Title:  Unfortunately, there was one circumstance which created a
Title:  powerful obstacle to the accomplishment of this threat; which
Title:  was, as we have related, that his sword had been in his first
Title:  conflict broken in two, and which he had entirely forgotten.
Title:  Hence, it resulted when d'Artagnan proceeded to draw his sword in
Title:  earnest, he found himself purely and simply armed with a stump of
Title:  a sword about eight or ten inches in length, which the host had
Title:  carefully placed in the scabbard.  As to the rest of the blade,
Title:  the master had slyly put that on one side to make himself a
Title:  larding pin.
Title:  
Title:  But this deception would probably not have stopped our fiery
Title:  young man if the host had not reflected that the reclamation
Title:  which his guest made was perfectly just.
Title:  
Title:  "But, after all," said he, lowering the point of his spit, "where
Title:  is this letter?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, where is this letter?" cried d'Artagnan.  "In the first
Title:  place, I warn you that that letter is for Monsieur de Treville,
Title:  and it must be found, he will know how to find it."
Title:  
Title:  His threat completed the intimidation of the host.  After the
Title:  king and the cardinal, M. de Treville was the man whose name was
Title:  perhaps most frequently repeated by the military, and even by
Title:  citizens.  There was, to be sure, Father Joseph, but his name was
Title:  never pronounced but with a subdued voice, such was the terror
Title:  inspired by his Gray Eminence, as the cardinal's familiar was
Title:  called.
Title:  
Title:  Throwing down his spit, and ordering his wife to do the same with
Title:  her broom handle, and the servants with their sticks, he set the
Title:  first example of commencing an earnest search for the lost
Title:  letter.
Title:  
Title:  "Does the letter contain anything valuable?" demanded the host,
Title:  after a few minutes of useless investigation.
Title:  
Title:  "Zounds! I think it does indeed!" cried the Gascon, who reckoned
Title:  upon this letter for making his way at court.  "It contained my
Title:  fortune!"
Title:  
Title:  "Bills upon Spain?" asked the disturbed host.
Title:  
Title:  "Bills upon his Majesty's private treasury," answered d'Artagnan,
Title:  who, reckoning upon entering into the king's service in
Title:  consequence of this recommendation, believed he could make this
Title:  somewhat hazardous reply without telling of a falsehood.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" cried the host, at his wit's end.
Title:  
Title:  "But it's of no importance," continued d'Artagnan, with natural
Title:  assurance; "it's of no importance.  The money is nothing; that
Title:  letter was everything.  I would rather have lost a thousand
Title:  pistoles than have lost it."  He would not have risked more if he
Title:  had said twenty thousand; but a certain juvenile modesty
Title:  restrained him.
Title:  
Title:  A ray of light all at once broke upon the mind of the host as he
Title:  was giving himself to the devil upon finding nothing.
Title:  
Title:  "That letter is not lost!" cried he.
Title:  
Title:  "What!" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "No, it has been stolen from you."
Title:  
Title:  "Stolen? By whom?"
Title:  
Title:  "By the gentleman who was here yesterday.  He came down into the
Title:  kitchen, where your doublet was.  He remained there some time
Title:  alone.  I would lay a wager he has stolen it."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you think so?" answered d'Artagnan, but little convinced, as
Title:  he knew better than anyone else how entirely personal the value
Title:  of this letter was, and was nothing in it likely to tempt
Title:  cupidity.  The fact was that none of his servants, none of the
Title:  travelers present, could have gained anything by being possessed
Title:  of this paper.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you say," resumed d'Artagnan, "that you suspect that
Title:  impertinent gentleman?"
Title:  
Title:  "I tell you I am sure of it," continued the host.  "When I
Title:  informed him that your lordship was the protege of Monsieur de
Title:  Treville, and that you even had a letter for that illustrious
Title:  gentleman, he appeared to be very much disturbed, and asked me
Title:  where that letter was, and immediately came down into the
Title:  kitchen, where he knew your doublet was."
Title:  
Title:  "Then that's my thief," replied d'Artagnan.  "I will complain to
Title:  Monsieur de Treville, and Monsieur de Treville will complain to
Title:  the king."  He then drew two crowns majestically from his purse
Title:  and gave them to the host, who accompanied him, cap in hand, to
Title:  the gate, and remounted his yellow horse, which bore him without
Title:  any further accident to the gate of St. Antoine at Paris, where
Title:  his owner sold him for three crowns, which was a very good price,
Title:  considering that d'Artagnan had ridden him hard during the last
Title:  stage.  Thus the dealer to whom d'Artagnan sold him for the nine
Title:  livres did not conceal from the young man that he only gave that
Title:  enormous sum for him on the account of the originality of his
Title:  color.
Title:  
Title:  Thus d'Artagnan entered Paris on foot, carrying his little packet
Title:  under his arm, and walked about till he found an apartment to be
Title:  let on terms suited to the scantiness of his means.  This chamber
Title:  was a sort of garret, situated in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, near
Title:  the Luxembourg.
Title:  
Title:  As soon as the earnest money was paid, d'Artagnan took possession
Title:  of his lodging, and passed the remainder of the day in sewing
Title:  onto his doublet and hose some ornamental braiding which his
Title:  mother had taken off an almost-new doublet of the elder M.
Title:  d'Artagnan, and which she had given her son secretly.  Next he
Title:  went to the Quai de Feraille to have a new blade put to his
Title:  sword, and then returned toward the Louvre, inquiring of the
Title:  first Musketeer he met for the situation of the hotel of M. de
Title:  Treville, which proved to be in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier; that
Title:  is to say, in the immediate vicinity of the chamber hired by
Title:  d'Artagnan--a circumstance which appeared to furnish a happy
Title:  augury for the success of his journey.
Title:  
Title:  After this, satisfied with the way in which he had conducted
Title:  himself at Meung, without remorse for the past, confident in the
Title:  present, and full of hope for the future, he retired to bed and
Title:  slept the sleep of the brave.
Title:  
Title:  This sleep, provincial as it was, brought him to nine o'clock in
Title:  the morning; at which hour he rose, in order to repair to the
Title:  residence of M. de Treville, the third personage in the kingdom, in the
Title:  paternal estimation.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  2  THE ANTECHAMBER OF M. DE TREVILLE
Title:  
Title:  M. de Troisville, as his family was still called in Gascony, or
Title:  M. de Treville, as he has ended by styling himself in Paris, had
Title:  really commenced life as d'Artagnan now did; that is to say,
Title:  without a sou in his pocket, but with a fund of audacity,
Title:  shrewdness, and intelligence which makes the poorest Gascon
Title:  gentleman often derive more in his hope from the paternal
Title:  inheritance than the richest Perigordian or Berrichan gentleman
Title:  derives in reality from his.  His insolent bravery, his still
Title:  more insolent success at a time when blows poured down like hail,
Title:  had borne him to the top of that difficult ladder called Court
Title:  Favor, which he had climbed four steps at a time.
Title:  
Title:  He was the friend of the king, who honored highly, as everyone
Title:  knows, the memory of his father, Henry IV.  The father of M. de
Title:  Treville had served him so faithfully in his wars against the
Title:  league that in default of money--a thing to which the Bearnais
Title:  was accustomed all his life, and who constantly paid his debts
Title:  with that of which he never stood in need of borrowing, that is
Title:  to say, with ready wit--in default of money, we repeat, he
Title:  authorized him, after the reduction of Paris, to assume for his
Title:  arms a golden lion passant upon gules, with the motto FIDELIS ET
Title:  FORTIS.  This was a great matter in the way of honor, but very
Title:  little in the way of wealth; so that when the illustrious
Title:  companion of the great Henry died, the only inheritance he was
Title:  able to leave his son was his sword and his motto.  Thanks to
Title:  this double gift and the spotless name that accompanied it, M. de
Title:  Treville was admitted into the household of the young prince
Title:  where he made such good use of his sword, and was so faithful to
Title:  his motto, that Louis XIII, one of the good blades of his
Title:  kingdom, was accustomed to say that if he had a friend who was
Title:  about to fight, he would advise him to choose as a second,
Title:  himself first, and Treville next--or even, perhaps, before
Title:  himself.
Title:  
Title:  Thus Louis XIII had a real liking for Treville--a royal liking, a
Title:  self-interested liking, it is true, but still a liking.  At that
Title:  unhappy period it was an important consideration to be surrounded
Title:  by such men as Treville.  Many might take for their device the
Title:  epithet STRONG, which formed the second part of his motto, but
Title:  very few gentlemen could lay claim to the FAITHFUL, which
Title:  constituted the first.  Treville was one of these latter.  His
Title:  was one of those rare organizations, endowed with an obedient
Title:  intelligence like that of the dog; with a blind valor, a quick
Title:  eye, and a prompt hand; to whom sight appeared only to be given
Title:  to see if the king were dissatisfied with anyone, and the hand to
Title:  strike this displeasing personage, whether a Besme, a Maurevers,
Title:  a Poltiot de Mere, or a Vitry.  In short, up to this period
Title:  nothing had been wanting to Treville but opportunity; but he was
Title:  ever on the watch for it, and he faithfully promised himself that
Title:  he would not fail to seize it by its three hairs whenever it came
Title:  within reach of his hand.  At last Louis XIII made Treville the
Title:  captain of his Musketeers, who were to Louis XIII in devotedness,
Title:  or rather in fanaticism, what his Ordinaries had been to Henry
Title:  III, and his Scotch Guard to Louis XI.
Title:  
Title:  On his part, the cardinal was not behind the king in this
Title:  respect.  When he saw the formidable and chosen body with which
Title:  Louis XIII had surrounded himself, this second, or rather this
Title:  first king of France, became desirous that he, too, should have
Title:  his guard.  He had his Musketeers therefore, as Louis XIII had
Title:  his, and these two powerful rivals vied with each other in
Title:  procuring, not only from all the provinces of France, but even
Title:  from all foreign states, the most celebrated swordsmen.  It was
Title:  not uncommon for Richelieu and Louis XIII to dispute over their
Title:  evening game of chess upon the merits of their servants.  Each
Title:  boasted the bearing and the courage of his own people.  While
Title:  exclaiming loudly against duels and brawls, they excited them
Title:  secretly to quarrel, deriving an immoderate satisfaction or
Title:  genuine regret from the success or defeat of their own
Title:  combatants.  We learn this from the memoirs of a man who was
Title:  concerned in some few of these defeats and in many of these
Title:  victories.
Title:  
Title:  Treville had grasped the weak side of his master; and it was to
Title:  this address that he owed the long and constant favor of a king
Title:  who has not left the reputation behind him of being very faithful
Title:  in his friendships.  He paraded his Musketeers before the
Title:  Cardinal Armand Duplessis with an insolent air which made the
Title:  gray moustache of his Eminence curl with ire.  Treville
Title:  understood admirably the war method of that period, in which he
Title:  who could not live at the expense of the enemy must live at the
Title:  expense of his compatriots.  His soldiers formed a legion of
Title:  devil-may-care fellows, perfectly undisciplined toward all but
Title:  himself.
Title:  
Title:  Loose, half-drunk, imposing, the king's Musketeers, or rather M.
Title:  de Treville's, spread themselves about in the cabarets, in the
Title:  public walks, and the public sports, shouting, twisting their
Title:  mustaches, clanking their swords, and taking great pleasure in
Title:  annoying the Guards of the cardinal whenever they could fall in
Title:  with them; then drawing in the open streets, as if it were the
Title:  best of all possible sports; sometimes killed, but sure in that
Title:  case to be both wept and avenged; often killing others, but then
Title:  certain of not rotting in prison, M. de Treville being there to
Title:  claim them.  Thus M. de Treville was praised to the highest note
Title:  by these men, who adored him, and who, ruffians as they were,
Title:  trembled before him like scholars before their master, obedient
Title:  to his least word, and ready to sacrifice themselves to wash out
Title:  the smallest insult.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville employed this powerful weapon for the king, in the
Title:  first place, and the friends of the king--and then for himself
Title:  and his own friends.  For the rest, in the memoirs of this
Title:  period, which has left so many memoirs, one does not find this
Title:  worthy gentleman blamed even by his enemies; and he had many such
Title:  among men of the pen as well as among men of the sword.  In no
Title:  instance, let us say, was this worthy gentleman accused of
Title:  deriving personal advantage from the cooperation of his minions.
Title:  Endowed with a rare genius for intrigue which rendered him the
Title:  equal of the ablest intriguers, he remained an honest man.  Still
Title:  further, in spite of sword thrusts which weaken, and painful
Title:  exercises which fatigue, he had become one of the most gallant
Title:  frequenters of revels, one of the most insinuating lady's men,
Title:  one of the softest whisperers of interesting nothings of his
Title:  day; the BONNES FORTUNES of de Treville were talked of as those
Title:  of M. de Bassompierre had been talked of twenty years before, and
Title:  that was not saying a little.  The captain of the Musketeers was
Title:  therefore admired, feared, and loved; and this constitutes the
Title:  zenith of human fortune.
Title:  
Title:  Louis XIV absorbed all the smaller stars of his court in his own
Title:  vast radiance; but his father, a sun PLURIBUS IMPAR, left his
Title:  personal splendor to each of his favorites, his individual value
Title:  to each of his courtiers.  In addition to the leeves of the king
Title:  and the cardinal, there might be reckoned in Paris at that time
Title:  more than two hundred smaller but still noteworthy leeves.  Among
Title:  these two hundred leeves, that of Treville was one of the most
Title:  sought.
Title:  
Title:  The court of his hotel, situated in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier,
Title:  resembled a camp from by six o'clock in the morning in summer and
Title:  eight o'clock in winter.  From fifty to sixty Musketeers, who
Title:  appeared to replace one another in order always to present an
Title:  imposing number, paraded constantly, armed to the teeth and ready
Title:  for anything.  On one of those immense staircases, upon whose
Title:  space modern civilization would build a whole house, ascended and
Title:  descended the office seekers of Paris, who ran after any sort of
Title:  favor--gentlemen from the provinces anxious to be enrolled, and
Title:  servants in all sorts of liveries, bringing and carrying messages
Title:  between their masters and M. de Treville.  In the antechamber,
Title:  upon long circular benches, reposed the elect; that is to say,
Title:  those who were called.  In this apartment a continued buzzing
Title:  prevailed from morning till night, while M. de Treville, in his
Title:  office contiguous to this antechamber, received visits, listened
Title:  to complaints, gave his orders, and like the king in his balcony
Title:  at the Louvre, had only to place himself at the window to review
Title:  both his men and arms.
Title:  
Title:  The day on which d'Artagnan presented himself the assemblage was
Title:  imposing, particularly for a provincial just arriving from his
Title:  province.  It is true that this provincial was a Gascon; and
Title:  that, particularly at this period, the compatriots of d'Artagnan
Title:  had the reputation of not being easily intimidated.  When he had
Title:  once passed the massive door covered with long square-headed
Title:  nails, he fell into the midst of a troop of swordsmen, who
Title:  crossed one another in their passage, calling out, quarreling,
Title:  and playing tricks one with another.  In order to make one's way
Title:  amid these turbulent and conflicting waves, it was necessary to
Title:  be an officer, a great noble, or a pretty woman.
Title:  
Title:  It was, then, into the midst of this tumult and disorder that our
Title:  young man advanced with a beating heat, ranging his long rapier
Title:  up his lanky leg, and keeping one hand on the edge of his cap,
Title:  with that half-smile of the embarrassed a provincial who wishes
Title:  to put on a good face.  When he had passed one group he began to
Title:  breathe more freely; but he could not help observing that they
Title:  turned round to look at him, and for the first time in his life
Title:  d'Artagnan, who had till that day entertained a very good opinion
Title:  of himself, felt ridiculous.
Title:  
Title:  Arrived at the staircase, it was still worse.  There were four
Title:  Musketeers on the bottom steps, amusing themselves with the
Title:  following exercise, while ten or twelve of their comrades waited
Title:  upon the landing place to take their turn in the sport.
Title:  
Title:  One of them, stationed upon the top stair, naked sword in hand,
Title:  prevented, or at least endeavored to prevent, the three others
Title:  from ascending.
Title:  
Title:  These three others fenced against him with their agile swords.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan at first took these weapons for foils, and believed
Title:  them to be buttoned; but he soon perceived by certain scratches
Title:  that every weapon was pointed and sharpened, and that at each of
Title:  these scratches not only the spectators, but even the actors
Title:  themselves, laughed like so many madmen.
Title:  
Title:  He who at the moment occupied the upper step kept his adversaries
Title:  marvelously in check.  A circle was formed around them.  The
Title:  conditions required that at every hit the man touched should quit
Title:  the game, yielding his turn for the benefit of the adversary who
Title:  had hit him.  In five minutes three were slightly wounded, one on
Title:  the hand, another on the ear, by the defender of the stair, who
Title:  himself remained intact--a piece of skill which was worth to him,
Title:  according to the rules agreed upon, three turns of favor.
Title:  
Title:  However difficult it might be, or rather as he pretended it was,
Title:  to astonish our young traveler, this pastime really astonished
Title:  him.  He had seen in his province--that land in which heads
Title:  become so easily heated--a few of the preliminaries of duels; but
Title:  the daring of these four fencers appeared to him the strongest he
Title:  had ever heard of even in Gascony.  He believed himself
Title:  transported into that famous country of giants into which
Title:  Gulliver afterward went and was so frightened; and yet he had not
Title:  gained the goal, for there were still the landing place and the
Title:  antechamber.
Title:  
Title:  On the landing they were no longer fighting, but amused
Title:  themselves with stories about women, and in the antechamber, with
Title:  stories about the court.  On the landing d'Artagnan blushed; in
Title:  the antechamber he trembled.  His warm and fickle imagination,
Title:  which in Gascony had rendered formidable to young chambermaids,
Title:  and even sometimes their mistresses, had never dreamed, even in
Title:  moments of delirium, of half the amorous wonders or a quarter of
Title:  the feats of gallantry which were here set forth in connection
Title:  with names the best known and with details the least concealed.
Title:  But if his morals were shocked on the landing, his respect for
Title:  the cardinal was scandalized in the antechamber.  There, to his
Title:  great astonishment, d'Artagnan heard the policy which made all
Title:  Europe tremble criticized aloud and openly, as well as the
Title:  private life of the cardinal, which so many great nobles had been
Title:  punished for trying to pry into.  That great man who was so
Title:  revered by d'Artagnan the elder served as an object of ridicule
Title:  to the Musketeers of Treville, who cracked their jokes upon his
Title:  bandy legs and his crooked back.  Some sang ballads about Mme.
Title:  d'Aguillon, his mistress, and Mme. Cambalet, his niece; while
Title:  others formed parties and plans to annoy the pages and guards of
Title:  the cardinal duke--all things which appeared to d'Artagnan
Title:  monstrous impossibilities.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, when the name of the king was now and then uttered
Title:  unthinkingly amid all these cardinal jests, a sort of gag seemed
Title:  to close for a moment on all these jeering mouths.  They looked
Title:  hesitatingly around them, and appeared to doubt the thickness of
Title:  the partition between them and the office of M. de Treville; but
Title:  a fresh allusion soon brought back the conversation to his
Title:  Eminence, and then the laughter recovered its loudness and the
Title:  light was not withheld from any of his actions.
Title:  
Title:  "Certes, these fellows will all either be imprisoned or hanged,"
Title:  thought the terrified d'Artagnan, "and I, no doubt, with them;
Title:  for from the moment I have either listened to or heard them, I
Title:  shall be held as an accomplice.  What would my good father say,
Title:  who so strongly pointed out to me the respect due to the
Title:  cardinal, if he knew I was in the society of such pagans?"
Title:  
Title:  We have no need, therefore, to say that d'Artagnan dared not join
Title:  in the conversation, only he looked with all his eyes and
Title:  listened with all his ears, stretching his five senses so as to
Title:  lose nothing; and despite his confidence on the paternal
Title:  admonitions, he felt himself carried by his tastes and led by his
Title:  instincts to praise rather than to blame the unheard-of things
Title:  which were taking place.
Title:  
Title:  Although he was a perfect stranger in the court of M. de
Title:  Treville's courtiers, and this his first appearance in that
Title:  place, he was at length noticed, and somebody came and asked him
Title:  what he wanted.  At this demand d'Artagnan gave his name very
Title:  modestly, emphasized the title of compatriot, and begged the
Title:  servant who had put the question to him to request a moment's
Title:  audience of M. de Treville--a request which the other, with an
Title:  air of protection, promised to transmit in due season.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, a little recovered from his first surprise, had now
Title:  leisure to study costumes and physiognomy.
Title:  
Title:  The center of the most animated group was a Musketeer of great
Title:  height and haughty countenance, dressed in a costume so peculiar
Title:  as to attract general attention.  He did not wear the uniform
Title:  cloak--which was not obligatory at that epoch of less liberty but
Title:  more independence--but a cerulean-blue doublet, a little faded and
Title:  worn, and over this a magnificent baldric, worked in gold, which
Title:  shone like water ripples in the sun.  A long cloak of crimson
Title:  velvet fell in graceful folds from his shoulders, disclosing in
Title:  front the splendid baldric, from which was suspended a gigantic
Title:  rapier. This Musketeer had just come off guard, complained of
Title:  having a cold, and coughed from time to time affectedly.  It was
Title:  for this reason, as he said to those around him, that he had put
Title:  on his cloak; and while he spoke with a lofty air and twisted his
Title:  mustache disdainfully, all admired his embroidered baldric, and
Title:  d'Artagnan more than anyone.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "What would you have?" said the Musketeer.  "This fashion is
Title:  coming in.  It is a folly, I admit, but still it is the fashion.
Title:  Besides, one must lay out one's inheritance somehow."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, Porthos!" cried one of his companions, "don't try to make us
Title:  believe you obtained that baldric by paternal generosity.  It was
Title:  given to you by that veiled lady I met you with the other Sunday,
Title:  near the gate St. Honor."
Title:  
Title:  "No, upon honor and by the faith of a gentleman, I bought it with
Title:  the contents of my own purse," answered he whom they designated
Title:  by the name Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; about in the same manner," said another Musketeer, "that I
Title:  bought this new purse with what my mistress put into the old
Title:  one."
Title:  
Title:  "It's true, though," said Porthos; "and the proof is that I paid
Title:  twelve pistoles for it."
Title:  
Title:  The wonder was increased, though the doubt continued to exist.
Title:  
Title:  "Is it not true, Aramis?" said Porthos, turning toward another
Title:  Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  This other Musketeer formed a perfect contrast to his
Title:  interrogator, who had just designated him by the name of Aramis.
Title:  He was a stout man, of about two- or three-and-twenty, with an
Title:  open, ingenuous countenance, a black, mild eye, and cheeks rosy
Title:  and downy as an autumn peach.  His delicate mustache marked a
Title:  perfectly straight line upon his upper lip; he appeared to dread
Title:  to lower his hands lest their veins should swell, and he pinched
Title:  the tips of his ears from time to time to preserve their delicate
Title:  pink transparency.  Habitually he spoke little and slowly, bowed
Title:  frequently, laughed without noise, showing his teeth, which were
Title:  fine and of which, as the rest of his person, he appeared to take
Title:  great care.  He answered the appeal of his friend by an
Title:  affirmative nod of the head.
Title:  
Title:  This affirmation appeared to dispel all doubts with regard to the
Title:  baldric.  They continued to admire it, but said no more about it;
Title:  and with a rapid change of thought, the conversation passed
Title:  suddenly to another subject.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you think of the story Chalais's esquire relates?" asked
Title:  another Musketeer, without addressing anyone in particular, but
Title:  on the contrary speaking to everybody.
Title:  
Title:  "And what does he say?" asked Porthos, in a self-sufficient tone.
Title:  
Title:  "He relates that he met at Brussels Rochefort, the AME DAMNEE of
Title:  the cardinal disguised as a Capuchin, and that this cursed
Title:  Rochefort, thanks to his disguise, had tricked Monsieur de
Title:  Laigues, like a ninny as he is."
Title:  
Title:  "A ninny, indeed!" said Porthos; "but is the matter certain?"
Title:  
Title:  "I had it from Aramis," replied the Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, you knew it, Porthos," said Aramis.  "I told you of it
Title:  yesterday.  Let us say no more about it."
Title:  
Title:  "Say no more about it?  That's YOUR opinion!" replied Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Say no more about it!  PESTE!  You come to your conclusions
Title:  quickly.  What!  The cardinal sets a spy upon a gentleman, has
Title:  his letters stolen from him by means of a traitor, a brigand, a
Title:  rascal-has, with the help of this spy and thanks to this
Title:  correspondence, Chalais's throat cut, under the stupid pretext
Title:  that he wanted to kill the king and marry Monsieur to the queen!
Title:  Nobody knew a word of this enigma.  You unraveled it yesterday to
Title:  the great satisfaction of all; and while we are still gaping with
Title:  wonder at the news, you come and tell us today, 'Let us say no
Title:  more about it.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, let us talk about it, since you desire it," replied
Title:  Aramis, patiently.
Title:  
Title:  "This Rochefort," cried Porthos, "if I were the esquire of poor
Title:  Chalais, should pass a minute or two very uncomfortably with me."
Title:  
Title:  "And you--you would pass rather a sad quarter-hour with the Red
Title:  Duke," replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, the Red Duke!  Bravo!  Bravo!  The Red Duke!" cried Porthos,
Title:  clapping his hands and nodding his head.  "The Red Duke is
Title:  capital.  I'll circulate that saying, be assured, my dear fellow.
Title:  Who says this Aramis is not a wit?  What a misfortune it is you
Title:  did not follow your first vocation; what a delicious abbe you
Title:  would have made!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, it's only a temporary postponement," replied Aramis; "I
Title:  shall be one someday.  You very well know, Porthos, that I
Title:  continue to study theology for that purpose."
Title:  
Title:  "He will be one, as he says," cried Porthos; "he will be one,
Title:  sooner or later."
Title:  
Title:  "Sooner." said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "He only waits for one thing to determine him to resume his
Title:  cassock, which hangs behind his uniform," said another Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "What is he waiting for?" asked another.
Title:  
Title:  "Only till the queen has given an heir to the crown of France."
Title:  
Title:  "No jesting upon that subject, gentlemen," said Porthos; "thank
Title:  God the queen is still of an age to give one!"
Title:  
Title:  "They say that Monsieur de Buckingham is in France," replied
Title:  Aramis, with a significant smile which gave to this sentence,
Title:  apparently so simple, a tolerably scandalous meaning.
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis, my good friend, this time you are wrong," interrupted
Title:  Porthos.  "Your wit is always leading you beyond bounds; if
Title:  Monsieur de Treville heard you, you would repent of speaking
Title:  thus."
Title:  
Title:  "Are you going to give me a lesson, Porthos?" cried Aramis, from
Title:  whose usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning.
Title:  
Title:  "My dear fellow, be a Musketeer or an abbe.  Be one or the other,
Title:  but not both,"  replied Porthos.  "You know what Athos told you
Title:  the other day; you eat at everybody's mess.  Ah, don't be angry,
Title:  I beg of you, that would be useless; you know what is agreed upon
Title:  between you, Athos and me.  You go to Madame d'Aguillon's, and
Title:  you pay your court to her; you go to Madame de Bois-Tracy's, the
Title:  cousin of Madame de Chevreuse, and you pass for being far
Title:  advanced in the good graces of that lady.  Oh, good Lord!  Don't
Title:  trouble yourself to reveal your good luck; no one asks for your
Title:  secret-all the world knows your discretion.  But since you possess
Title:  that virtue, why the devil don't you make use of it with respect
Title:  to her Majesty?  Let whoever likes talk of the king and the
Title:  cardinal, and how he likes; but the queen is sacred, and if
Title:  anyone speaks of her, let it be respectfully."
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos, you are as vain as Narcissus; I plainly tell you so,"
Title:  replied Aramis.  "You know I hate moralizing, except when it is
Title:  done by Athos.  As to you, good sir, you wear too magnificent a
Title:  baldric to be strong on that head.  I will be an abbe if it suits
Title:  me.  In the meanwhile I am a Musketeer; in that quality I say
Title:  what I please, and at this moment it pleases me to say that you
Title:  weary me."
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis!"
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos!"
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen! Gentlemen!" cried the surrounding group.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur de Treville awaits Monsieur d'Artagnan," cried a
Title:  servant, throwing open the door of the cabinet.
Title:  
Title:  At this announcement, during which the door remained open,
Title:  everyone became mute, and amid the general silence the young man
Title:  crossed part of the length of the antechamber, and entered the
Title:  apartment of the captain of the Musketeers, congratulating
Title:  himself with all his heart at having so narrowly escaped the end
Title:  of this strange quarrel.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  3  THE AUDIENCE
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville was at the moment in rather ill-humor,
Title:  nevertheless he saluted the young man politely, who bowed to the
Title:  very ground; and he smiled on receiving d'Artagnan's response,
Title:  the Bearnese accent of which recalled to him at the same time
Title:  his youth and his country--a double remembrance which makes a man
Title:  smile at all ages; but stepping toward the antechamber and making
Title:  a sign to d'Artagnan with his hand, as if to ask his permission
Title:  to finish with others before he began with him, he called three
Title:  times, with a louder voice at each time, so that he ran through
Title:  the intervening tones between the imperative accent and the angry
Title:  accent.
Title:  
Title:  "Athos!  Porthos!  Aramis!"
Title:  
Title:  The two Musketeers with whom we have already made acquaintance,
Title:  and who answered to the last of these three names, immediately
Title:  quitted the group of which they had formed a part, and advanced
Title:  toward the cabinet, the door of which closed after them as soon
Title:  as they had entered.  Their appearance, although it was not quite
Title:  at ease, excited by its carelessness, at once full of dignity and
Title:  submission, the admiration of d'Artagnan, who beheld in these two
Title:  men demigods, and in their leader an Olympian Jupiter, armed with
Title:  all his thunders.
Title:  
Title:  When the two Musketeers had entered; when the door was closed
Title:  behind them; when the buzzing murmur of the antechamber, to which
Title:  the summons which had been made had doubtless furnished fresh
Title:  food, had recommenced; when M. de Treville had three or four
Title:  times paced in silence, and with a frowning brow, the whole
Title:  length of his cabinet, passing each time before Porthos and
Title:  Aramis, who were as upright and silent as if on parade--he
Title:  stopped all at once full in front of them, and covering them from
Title:  head to foot with an angry look, "Do you know what the king said
Title:  to me," cried he, "and that no longer ago than yesterday
Title:  evening--do you know, gentlemen?"
Title:  
Title:  "No," replied the two Musketeers, after a moment's silence, "no,
Title:  sir, we do not."
Title:  
Title:  "But I hope that you will do us the honor to tell us," added
Title:  Aramis, in his politest tone and with his most graceful bow.
Title:  
Title:  "He told me that he should henceforth recruit his Musketeers from
Title:  among the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "The Guards of the cardinal! And why so?" asked Porthos, warmly.
Title:  
Title:  "Because he plainly perceives that his piquette* stands in need
Title:  of being enlivened by a mixture of good wine."
Title:  
Title:  *A watered liquor, made from the second pressing of the grape.
Title:  
Title:  The two Musketeers reddened to the whites of their eyes.
Title:  d'Artagnan did not know where he was, and wished himself a
Title:  hundred feet underground.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," continued M. de Treville, growing warmer as he spoke,
Title:  "and his majesty was right; for, upon my honor, it is true that
Title:  the Musketeers make but a miserable figure at court.  The
Title:  cardinal related yesterday while playing with the king, with an
Title:  air of condolence very displeasing to me, that the day before
Title:  yesterday those DAMNED MUSKETEERS, those DAREDEVILS--he dwelt
Title:  upon those words with an ironical tone still more displeasing to
Title:  me--those BRAGGARTS, added he, glancing at me with his tiger-
Title:  cat's eye, had made a riot in the Rue Ferou in a cabaret, and
Title:  that a party of his Guards (I thought he was going to laugh in my
Title:  face) had been forced to arrest the rioters!  MORBLEU!  You must
Title:  know something about it.  Arrest Musketeers!  You were among
Title:  them--you were!  Don't deny it; you were recognized, and the
Title:  cardinal named you.  But it's all my fault; yes, it's all my
Title:  fault, because it is myself who selects my men.  You, Aramis, why
Title:  the devil did you ask me for a uniform when you would have been
Title:  so much better in a cassock?  And you, Porthos, do you only wear
Title:  such a fine golden baldric to suspend a sword of straw from it?
Title:  And Athos--I don't see Athos.  Where is he?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ill--" 
Title:  
Title:  "Very ill, say you? And of what malady?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is feared that it may be the smallpox, sir," replied Porthos,
Title:  desirous of taking his turn in the conversation; "and what is
Title:  serious is that it will certainly spoil his face."
Title:  
Title:  "The smallpox!  That's a great story to tell me, Porthos!  Sick
Title:  of the smallpox at his age!  No, no; but wounded without doubt,
Title:  killed, perhaps.  Ah, if I knew! S'blood!  Messieurs Musketeers,
Title:  I will not have this haunting of bad places, this quarreling in
Title:  the streets, this swordplay at the crossways; and above all, I
Title:  will not have occasion given for the cardinal's Guards, who are
Title:  brave, quiet, skillful men who never put themselves in a
Title:  position to be arrested, and who, besides, never allow themselves
Title:  to be arrested, to laugh at you!  I am sure of it--they would
Title:  prefer dying on the spot to being arrested or taking back a step.
Title:  To save yourselves, to scamper away, to flee--that is good for
Title:  the king's Musketeers!"
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis trembled with rage.  They could willingly have
Title:  strangled M. de Treville, if, at the bottom of all this, they had
Title:  not felt it was the great love he bore them which made him speak
Title:  thus.  They stamped upon the carpet with their feet; they bit
Title:  their lips till the blood came, and grasped the hilts of their
Title:  swords with all their might.  All without had heard, as we have
Title:  said, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis called, and had guessed, from M.
Title:  de Treville's tone of voice, that he was very angry about
Title:  something.  Ten curious heads were glued to the tapestry and
Title:  became pale with fury; for their ears, closely applied to the
Title:  door, did not lose a syllable of what he said, while their mouths
Title:  repeated as he went on, the insulting expressions of the captain
Title:  to all the people in the antechamber.  In an instant, from the
Title:  door of the cabinet to the street gate, the whole hotel was
Title:  boiling.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah! The king's Musketeers are arrested by the Guards of the
Title:  cardinal, are they?" continued M. de Treville, as furious at
Title:  heart as his soldiers, but emphasizing his words and plunging
Title:  them, one by one, so to say, like so many blows of a stiletto,
Title:  into the bosoms of his auditors.  "What! Six of his Eminence's
Title:  Guards arrest six of his Majesty's Musketeers! MORBLEU!  My part
Title:  is taken!  I will go straight to the louvre; I will give in my
Title:  resignation as captain of the king's Musketeers to take a
Title:  lieutenancy in the cardinal's Guards, and if he refuses me,
Title:  MORBLEU!  I will turn abbe."
Title:  
Title:  At these words, the murmur without became an explosion; nothing
Title:  was to be heard but oaths and blasphemies.  The MORBLEUS, the
Title:  SANG DIEUS, the MORTS TOUTS LES DIABLES, crossed one another in
Title:  the air.  D'Artagnan looked for some tapestry behind which he
Title:  might hide himself, and felt an immense inclination to crawl
Title:  under the table.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, my Captain," said Porthos, quite beside himself, "the
Title:  truth is that we were six against six.  But we were not captured
Title:  by fair means; and before we had time to draw our swords, two of
Title:  our party were dead, and Athos, grievously wounded, was very
Title:  little better.  For you know Athos.  Well, Captain, he endeavored
Title:  twice to get up, and fell again twice.  And we did not
Title:  surrender--no!  They dragged us away by force.  On the way we
Title:  escaped.  As for Athos, they believed him to be dead, and left him
Title:  very quiet on the field of battle, not thinking it worth the trouble
Title:  to carry him away.  That's the whole story.  What the devil,
Title:  Captain, one cannot win all one's battles!  The great Pompey lost
Title:  that of Pharsalia; and Francis the First, who was, as I have
Title:  heard say, as good as other folks, nevertheless lost the Battle
Title:  of Pavia."
Title:  
Title:  "And I have the honor of assuring you that I killed one of them
Title:  with his own sword," said Aramis; "for mine was broken at the
Title:  first parry.  Killed him, or poniarded him, sir, as is most
Title:  agreeable to you."
Title:  
Title:  "I did not know that," replied M. de Treville, in a somewhat
Title:  softened tone.  "The cardinal exaggerated, as I perceive."
Title:  
Title:  "But pray, sir," continued Aramis, who, seeing his captain become
Title:  appeased, ventured to risk a prayer, "do not say that Athos is
Title:  wounded.  He would be in despair if that should come to the ears
Title:  of the king; and as the wound is very serious, seeing that after
Title:  crossing the shoulder it penetrates into the chest, it is to be feared--"
Title:  
Title:  At this instant the tapestry was raised and a noble and handsome
Title:  head, but frightfully pale, appeared under the fringe.
Title:  
Title:  "Athos!" cried the two Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  "Athos!" repeated M. de Treville himself.
Title:  
Title:  "You have sent for me, sir," said Athos to M. de Treville, in a
Title:  feeble yet perfectly calm voice, "you have sent for me, as my
Title:  comrades inform me, and I have hastened to receive your orders.
Title:  I am here; what do you want with me?"
Title:  
Title:  And at these words, the Musketeer, in irreproachable costume,
Title:  belted as usual, with a tolerably firm step, entered the cabinet.
Title:  M. de Treville, moved to the bottom of his heart by this proof of
Title:  courage, sprang toward him.
Title:  
Title:  "I was about to say to these gentlemen," added he, "that I forbid
Title:  my Musketeers to expose their lives needlessly; for brave men are
Title:  very dear to the king, and the king knows that his Musketeers are
Title:  the bravest on the earth.  Your hand, Athos!"
Title:  
Title:  And without waiting for the answer of the newcomer to this proof
Title:  of affection, M. de Treville seized his right hand and pressed it
Title:  with all his might, without perceiving that Athos, whatever might
Title:  be his self-command, allowed a slight murmur of pain to escape
Title:  him, and if possible, grew paler than he was before.
Title:  
Title:  The door had remained open, so strong was the excitement produced
Title:  by the arrival of Athos, whose wound, though kept as a secret,
Title:  was known to all.  A burst of satisfaction hailed the last words
Title:  of the captain; and two or three heads, carried away by the
Title:  enthusiasm of the moment, appeared through the openings of the
Title:  tapestry.  M. de Treville was about to reprehend this breach of
Title:  the rules of etiquette, when he felt the hand of Athos, who had
Title:  rallied all his energies to contend against pain, at length
Title:  overcome by it, fell upon the floor as if he were dead.
Title:  
Title:  "A surgeon!" cried M. de Treville, "mine! The king's! The best! A
Title:  surgeon! Or, s'blood, my brave Athos will die!"
Title:  
Title:  At the cries of M. de Treville, the whole assemblage rushed into
Title:  the cabinet, he not thinking to shut the door against anyone, and
Title:  all crowded round the wounded man.  But all this eager attention
Title:  might have been useless if the doctor so loudly called for
Title:  had not chanced to be in the hotel.  He pushed through the crowd,
Title:  approached Athos, still insensible, and as all this noise and
Title:  commotion inconvenienced him greatly, he required, as the first
Title:  and most urgent thing, that the Musketeer should be carried into
Title:  an adjoining chamber.  Immediately M. de Treville opened and
Title:  pointed the way to Porthos and Aramis, who bore their comrade in
Title:  their arms.  Behind this group walked the surgeon; and behind the
Title:  surgeon the door closed.
Title:  
Title:  The cabinet of M. de Treville, generally held so sacred, became
Title:  in an instant the annex of the antechamber.  Everyone spoke,
Title:  harangued, and vociferated, swearing, cursing, and consigning the
Title:  cardinal and his Guards to all the devils.
Title:  
Title:  An instant after, Porthos and Aramis re-entered, the surgeon and
Title:  M. de Treville alone remaining with the wounded.
Title:  
Title:  At length, M. de Treville himself returned.  The injured man had
Title:  recovered his senses.  The surgeon declared that the situation of
Title:  the Musketeer had nothing in it to render his friends uneasy, his
Title:  weakness having been purely and simply caused by loss of blood.
Title:  
Title:  Then M. de Treville made a sign with his hand, and all retired
Title:  except d'Artagnan, who did not forget that he had an audience,
Title:  and with the tenacity of a Gascon remained in his place.
Title:  
Title:  When all had gone out and the door was closed, M. de Treville, on
Title:  turning round, found himself alone with the young man.  The event
Title:  which had occurred had in some degree broken the thread of his
Title:  ideas.  He inquired what was the will of his persevering visitor.
Title:  d'Artagnan then repeated his name, and in an instant recovering
Title:  all his remembrances of the present and the past, M. de Treville
Title:  grasped the situation.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon me," said he, smiling, "pardon me my dear compatriot, but
Title:  I had wholly forgotten you.  But what help is there for it!  A
Title:  captain is nothing but a father of a family, charged with even a
Title:  greater responsibility than the father of an ordinary family.
Title:  Soldiers are big children; but as I maintain that the orders of
Title:  the king, and more particularly the orders of the cardinal,
Title:  should be executed--"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan could not restrain a smile.  By this smile M. de
Title:  Treville judged that he had not to deal with a fool, and changing
Title:  the conversation, came straight to the point.
Title:  
Title:  "I respected your father very much," said he.  "What can I do for
Title:  the son?  Tell me quickly; my time is not my own."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "on quitting Tarbes and coming
Title:  hither, it was my intention to request of you, in remembrance of
Title:  the friendship which you have not forgotten, the uniform of a
Title:  Musketeer; but after all that I have seen during the last two
Title:  hours, I comprehend that such a favor is enormous, and tremble
Title:  lest I should not merit it."
Title:  
Title:  "It is indeed a favor, young man," replied M. de Treville, "but
Title:  it may not be so far beyond your hopes as you believe, or rather
Title:  as you appear to believe.  But his majesty's decision is always
Title:  necessary; and I inform you with regret that no one becomes a
Title:  Musketeer without the preliminary ordeal of several campaigns,
Title:  certain brilliant actions, or a service of two years in some
Title:  other regiment less favored than ours."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan bowed without replying, feeling his desire to don the
Title:  Musketeer's uniform vastly increased by the great difficulties
Title:  which preceded the attainment of it.
Title:  
Title:  "But," continued M. de Treville, fixing upon his compatriot a
Title:  look so piercing that it might be said he wished to read the
Title:  thoughts of his heart, "on account of my old companion, your
Title:  father, as I have said, I will do something for you, young man.
Title:  Our recruits from Bearn are not generally very rich, and I have
Title:  no reason to think matters have much changed in this respect
Title:  since I left the province.  I dare say you have not brought too
Title:  large a stock of money with you?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan drew himself up with a proud air which plainly said,
Title:  "I ask alms of no man."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, that's very well, young man," continued M. de Treville,
Title:  "that's all very well.  I know these airs; I myself came to Paris
Title:  with four crowns in my purse, and would have fought with anyone
Title:  who dared to tell me I was not in a condition to purchase the
Title:  Louvre."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan's bearing became still more imposing.  Thanks to the
Title:  sale of his horse, he commenced his career with four more crowns
Title:  than M. de Treville possessed at the commencement of his.
Title:  
Title:  "You ought, I say, then, to husband the means you have, however
Title:  large the sum may be; but you ought also to endeavor to perfect
Title:  yourself in the exercises becoming a gentleman.  I will write a
Title:  letter today to the Director of the Royal Academy, and tomorrow
Title:  he will admit you without any expense to yourself.  Do not refuse
Title:  this little service.  Our best-born and richest gentlemen
Title:  sometimes solicit it without being able to obtain it.  You will
Title:  learn horsemanship, swordsmanship in all its branches, and
Title:  dancing.  You will make some desirable acquaintances; and from
Title:  time to time you can call upon me, just to tell me how you are getting
Title:  on, and to say whether I can be of further service to you."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, stranger as he was to all the manners of a court,
Title:  could not but perceive a little coldness in this reception.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, sir," said he, "I cannot but perceive how sadly I miss the
Title:  letter of introduction which my father gave me to present to
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "I certainly am surprised," replied M. de Treville, "that you
Title:  should undertake so long a journey without that necessary
Title:  passport, the sole resource of us poor Bearnese."
Title:  
Title:  "I had one, sir, and, thank God, such as I could wish," cried
Title:  d'Artagnan; "but it was perfidiously stolen from me."
Title:  
Title:  He then related the adventure of Meung, described the unknown
Title:  gentleman with the greatest minuteness, and all with a warmth and
Title:  truthfulness that delighted M. de Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "This is all very strange," said M. de Treville, after meditating
Title:  a minute; "you mentioned my name, then, aloud?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sir, I certainly committed that imprudence; but why should
Title:  I have done otherwise?  A name like yours must be as a buckler to
Title:  me on my way.  Judge if I should not put myself under its
Title:  protection."
Title:  
Title:  Flattery was at that period very current, and M. de Treville
Title:  loved incense as well as a king, or even a cardinal.  He could
Title:  not refrain from a smile of visible satisfaction; but this smile
Title:  soon disappeared, and returning to the adventure of Meung, "Tell
Title:  me," continued he, "had not this gentlemen a slight scar on his
Title:  cheek?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, such a one as would be made by the grazing of a ball."
Title:  
Title:  "Was he not a fine-looking man?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Of lofty stature."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Of complexion and brown hair?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, that is he; how is it, sir, that you are acquainted
Title:  with this man?  If I ever find him again--and I will find him, I
Title:  swear, were it in hell!"
Title:  
Title:  "He was waiting for a woman," continued Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "He departed immediately after having conversed for a minute with
Title:  her whom he awaited."
Title:  
Title:  "You know not the subject of their conversation?"
Title:  
Title:  "He gave her a box, told her not to open it except in London."
Title:  
Title:  "Was this woman English?"
Title:  
Title:  "He called her Milady."
Title:  
Title:  "It is he; it must be he!"  murmured Treville.  "I believed him
Title:  still at Brussels."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, sir, if you know who this man is," cried d'Artagnan, "tell
Title:  me who he is, and whence he is.  I will then release you from all
Title:  your promises--even that of procuring my admission into the
Title:  Musketeers; for before everything, I wish to avenge myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Beware, young man!"  cried Treville.  "If you see him coming on
Title:  one side of the street, pass by on the other.  Do not cast
Title:  yourself against such a rock; he would break you like glass."
Title:  
Title:  "That will not prevent me," replied d'Artagnan, "if ever I find
Title:  him."
Title:  
Title:  "In the meantime," said Treville, "seek him not--if I have a
Title:  right to advise you."
Title:  
Title:  All at once the captain stopped, as if struck by a sudden
Title:  suspicion.  This great hatred which the young traveler manifested
Title:  so loudly for this man, who--a rather improbable thing--had
Title:  stolen his father's letter from him--was there not some perfidy
Title:  concealed under this hatred?  Might not this young man be sent by
Title:  his Eminence?  Might he not have come for the purpose of laying a
Title:  snare for him?  This pretended d'Artagnan--was he not an emissary
Title:  of the cardinal, whom the cardinal sought to introduce into
Title:  Treville's house, to place near him, to win his confidence, and
Title:  afterward to ruin him as had been done in a thousand other
Title:  instances?  He fixed his eyes upon d'Artagnan even more earnestly
Title:  than before.  He was moderately reassured however, by the aspect
Title:  of that countenance, full of astute intelligence and affected
Title:  humility.  "I know he is a Gascon," reflected he, "but he may be
Title:  one for the cardinal as well as for me.  Let us try him."
Title:  
Title:  "My friend," said he, slowly, "I wish, as the son of an ancient
Title:  friend--for I consider this story of the lost letter perfectly
Title:  true--I wish, I say, in order to repair the coldness you may have
Title:  remarked in my reception of you, to discover to you the secrets
Title:  of our policy.  The king and the cardinal are the best of
Title:  friends; their apparent bickerings are only feints to deceive
Title:  fools.  I am not willing that a compatriot, a handsome cavalier,
Title:  a brave youth, quite fit to make his way, should become the dupe
Title:  of all these artifices and fall into the snare after the example
Title:  of so many others who have been ruined by it.  Be assured that I
Title:  am devoted to both these all-powerful masters, and that my
Title:  earnest endeavors have no other aim than the service of the king,
Title:  and also the cardinal--one of the most illustrious geniuses that
Title:  France has ever produced.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, young man, regulate your conduct accordingly; and if you
Title:  entertain, whether from your family, your relations, or even from
Title:  your instincts, any of these enmities which we see constantly
Title:  breaking out against the cardinal, bid me adieu and let us
Title:  separate.  I will aid you in many ways, but without attaching you
Title:  to my person.  I hope that my frankness at least will make you my
Title:  friend; for you are the only young man to whom I have hitherto
Title:  spoken as I have done to you."
Title:  
Title:  Treville said to himself:  "If the cardinal has set this young
Title:  fox upon me, he will certainly not have failed--he, who knows how
Title:  bitterly I execrate him--to tell his spy that the best means of
Title:  making his court to me is to rail at him.  Therefore, in spite of
Title:  all my protestations, if it be as I suspect, my cunning gossip
Title:  will assure me that he holds his Eminence in horror."
Title:  
Title:  It, however, proved otherwise.  D'Artagnan answered, with the
Title:  greatest simplicity:  "I came to Paris with exactly such
Title:  intentions.  My father advised me to stoop to nobody but the
Title:  king, the cardinal, and yourself--whom he considered the first
Title:  three personages in France."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan added M. de Treville to the others, as may be
Title:  perceived; but he thought this addition would do no harm.
Title:  
Title:  "I have the greatest veneration for the cardinal," continued he,
Title:  "and the most profound respect for his actions.  So much the
Title:  better for me, sir, if you speak to me, as you say, with
Title:  frankness--for then you will do me the honor to esteem the
Title:  resemblance of our opinions; but if you have entertained any
Title:  doubt, as naturally you may, I feel that I am ruining myself by
Title:  speaking the truth.  But I still trust you will not esteem me the
Title:  less for it, and that is my object beyond all others."
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville was surprised to the greatest degree.  So much
Title:  penetration, so much frankness, created admiration, but did not
Title:  entirely remove his suspicions.  The more this young man was
Title:  superior to others, the more he was to be dreaded if he meant to
Title:  deceive him; "You are an honest youth; but at the present moment
Title:  I can only do for you that which I just now offered.  My hotel
Title:  will be always open to you.  Hereafter, being able to ask for me
Title:  at all hours, and consequently to take advantage of all
Title:  opportunities, you will probably obtain that which you desire."
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say," replied d'Artagnan, "that you will wait until I
Title:  have proved myself worthy of it.  Well, be assured," added he,
Title:  with the familiarity of a Gascon, "you shall not wait long."  And
Title:  he bowed in order to retire, and as if he considered the future
Title:  in his own hands.
Title:  
Title:  "But wait a minute," said M. de Treville, stopping him.  "I
Title:  promised you a letter for the director of the Academy.  Are you
Title:  too proud to accept it, young gentleman?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, sir," said d'Artagnan; "and I will guard it so carefully
Title:  that I will be sworn it shall arrive at its address, and woe be
Title:  to him who shall attempt to take it from me!"
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville smiled at this flourish; and leaving his young man
Title:  compatriot in the embrasure of the window, where they had talked
Title:  together, he seated himself at a table in order to write the
Title:  promised letter of recommendation.  While he was doing this,
Title:  d'Artagnan, having no better employment, amused himself with
Title:  beating a march upon the window and with looking at the
Title:  Musketeers, who went away, one after another, following them with
Title:  his eyes until they disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville, after having written the letter, sealed it, and
Title:  rising, approached the young man in order to give it to him.  But
Title:  at the very moment when d'Artagnan stretched out his hand to
Title:  receive it, M. de Treville was highly astonished to see his
Title:  protege make a sudden spring, become crimson with passion, and
Title:  rush from the cabinet crying, "S'blood, he shall not escape me
Title:  this time!"
Title:  
Title:  "And who?" asked M. de Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "He, my thief!" replied d'Artagnan.  "Ah, the traitor!" and he
Title:  disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil take the madman!" murmured M. de Treville, "unless,"
Title:  added he, "this is a cunning mode of escaping, seeing that he had
Title:  failed in his purpose!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  4  THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THE
Title:  HANDKERCHIEF OF ARAMIS
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, in a state of fury, crossed the antechamber at three
Title:  bounds, and was darting toward the stairs, which he reckoned upon
Title:  descending four at a time, when, in his heedless course, he ran
Title:  head foremost against a Musketeer who was coming out of one of M.
Title:  de Treville's private rooms, and striking his shoulder violently,
Title:  made him utter a cry, or rather a howl.
Title:  
Title:  "Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, endeavoring to resume his course,
Title:  "excuse me, but I am in a hurry."
Title:  
Title:  Scarcely had he descended the first stair, when a hand of iron
Title:  seized him by the belt and stopped him.
Title:  
Title:  "You are in a hurry?" said the Musketeer, as pale as a sheet.
Title:  "Under that pretense you run against me!  You say. 'Excuse me,'
Title:  and you believe that is sufficient?  Not at all my young man.  Do
Title:  you fancy because you have heard Monsieur de Treville speak to us
Title:  a little cavalierly today that other people are to treat us as he
Title:  speaks to us?  Undeceive yourself, comrade, you are not Monsieur
Title:  de Treville."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!" replied d'Artagnan, recognizing Athos, who, after the
Title:  dressing performed by the doctor, was returning to his own
Title:  apartment.  "I did not do it intentionally, and not doing it
Title:  intentionally, I said 'Excuse me.'  It appears to me that this is
Title:  quite enough.  I repeat to you, however, and this time on my word
Title:  of honor--I think perhaps too often--that I am in haste, great
Title:  haste.  Leave your hold, then, I beg of you, and let me go where
Title:  my business calls me."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said Athos, letting him go, "you are not polite; it
Title:  is easy to perceive that you come from a distance."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had already strode down three or four stairs, but at
Title:  Athos's last remark he stopped short.
Title:  
Title:  "MORBLEU, monsieur!" said he, "however far I may come, it is not
Title:  you who can give me a lesson in good manners, I warn you."
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  If I were not in such haste, and if I were not running
Title:  after someone," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Man-in-a-hurry, you can find me without running--ME,
Title:  you understand?"
Title:  
Title:  "And where, I pray you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Near the Carmes-Deschaux."
Title:  
Title:  "At what hour?"
Title:  
Title:  "About noon."
Title:  
Title:  "About noon?  That will do; I will be there."
Title:  
Title:  "Endeavor not to make me wait; for at quarter past twelve I will
Title:  cut off your ears as you run."
Title:  
Title:  "Good!" cried d'Artagnan, "I will be there ten minutes before
Title:  twelve."  And he set off running as if the devil possessed him,
Title:  hoping that he might yet find the stranger, whose slow pace could
Title:  not have carried him far.
Title:  
Title:  But at the street gate, Porthos was talking with the soldier on
Title:  guard.  Between the two talkers there was just enough room for a
Title:  man to pass.  D'Artagnan thought it would suffice for him, and he
Title:  sprang forward like a dart between them.  But d'Artagnan had
Title:  reckoned without the wind.  As he was about to pass, the wind
Title:  blew out Porthos's long cloak, and d'Artagnan rushed straight
Title:  into the middle of it.  Without doubt, Porthos had reasons for
Title:  not abandoning this part of his vestments, for instead of
Title:  quitting his hold on the flap in his hand, he pulled it toward
Title:  him, so that d'Artagnan rolled himself up in the velvet by a
Title:  movement of rotation explained by the persistency of Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, hearing the Musketeer swear, wished to escape from
Title:  the cloak, which blinded him, and sought to find his way from
Title:  under the folds of it.  He was particularly anxious to avoid
Title:  marring the freshness of the magnificent baldric we are
Title:  acquainted with; but on timidly opening his eyes, he found
Title:  himself with his nose fixed between the two shoulders of
Title:  Porthos--that is to say, exactly upon the baldric.
Title:  
Title:  Alas, like most things in this world which have nothing in their
Title:  favor but appearances, the baldric was glittering with gold in
Title:  the front, but was nothing but simple buff behind.  Vainglorious
Title:  as he was, Porthos could not afford to have a baldric wholly of
Title:  gold, but had at least half.  One could comprehend the necessity
Title:  of the cold and the urgency of the cloak.
Title:  
Title:  "Bless me!" cried Porthos, making strong efforts to disembarrass
Title:  himself of d'Artagnan, who was wriggling about his back; "you
Title:  must be mad to run against people in this manner."
Title:  
Title:  "Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, reappearing under the shoulder of
Title:  the giant, "but I am in such haste--I was running after someone
Title:  and--"
Title:  
Title:  "And do you always forget your eyes when you run?" asked Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "No," replied d'Artagnan, piqued, "and thanks to my eyes, I can
Title:  see what other people cannot see."
Title:  
Title:  Whether Porthos understood him or did not understand him, giving
Title:  way to his anger, "Monsieur," said he, "you stand a chance of
Title:  getting chastised if you rub Musketeers in this fashion."
Title:  
Title:  "Chastised, Monsieur!" said d'Artagnan, "the expression is
Title:  strong."
Title:  
Title:  "It is one that becomes a man accustomed to look his enemies in
Title:  the face."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, PARDIEU!  I know full well that you don't turn your back to
Title:  yours."
Title:  
Title:  And the young man, delighted with his joke, went away laughing
Title:  loudly.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos foamed with rage, and made a movement to rush after
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Presently, presently," cried the latter, "when you haven't your
Title:  cloak on."
Title:  
Title:  "At one o'clock, then, behind the Luxembourg."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well, at one o'clock, then," replied d'Artagnan, turning
Title:  the angle of the street.
Title:  
Title:  But neither in the street he had passed through, nor in the one
Title:  which his eager glance pervaded, could he see anyone; however
Title:  slowly the stranger had walked, he was gone on his way, or
Title:  perhaps had entered some house.  D'Artagnan inquired of everyone
Title:  he met with, went down to the ferry, came up again by the Rue de
Title:  Seine, and the Red Cross; but nothing, absolutely nothing!  This
Title:  chase was, however, advantageous to him in one sense, for in
Title:  proportion as the perspiration broke from his forehead, his heart
Title:  began to cool.
Title:  
Title:  He began to reflect upon the events that had passed; they were
Title:  numerous and inauspicious.  It was scarcely eleven o'clock in the
Title:  morning, and yet this morning had already brought him into
Title:  disgrace with M. de Treville, who could not fail to think the
Title:  manner in which d'Artagnan had left him a little cavalier.
Title:  
Title:  Besides this, he had drawn upon himself two good duels with two
Title:  men, each capable of killing three d'Artagnans--with two
Title:  Musketeers, in short, with two of those beings whom he esteemed
Title:  so greatly that he placed them in his mind and heart above all
Title:  other men.
Title:  
Title:  The outlook was sad.  Sure of being killed by Athos, it may
Title:  easily be understood that the young man was not very uneasy about
Title:  Porthos.  As hope, however, is the last thing extinguished in the
Title:  heart of man, he finished by hoping that he might survive, even
Title:  though with terrible wounds, in both these duels; and in case of
Title:  surviving, he made the following reprehensions upon his own
Title:  conduct:
Title:  
Title:  "What a madcap I was, and what a stupid fellow I am!  That brave
Title:  and unfortunate Athos was wounded on that very shoulder against
Title:  which I must run head foremost, like a ram.  The only thing that
Title:  astonishes me is that he did not strike me dead at once.  He had
Title:  good cause to do so; the pain I gave him must have been
Title:  atrocious.  As to Porthos--oh, as to Porthos, faith, that's a
Title:  droll affair!"
Title:  
Title:  And in spite of himself, the young man began to laugh aloud,
Title:  looking round carefully, however, to see that his solitary laugh,
Title:  without a cause in the eyes of passers-by, offended no one.
Title:  
Title:  "As to Porthos, that is certainly droll; but I am not the less a
Title:  giddy fool.  Are people to be run against without warning?  No!
Title:  And have I any right to go and peep under their cloaks to see
Title:  what is not there?  He would have pardoned me, he would certainly
Title:  have pardoned me, if I had not said anything to him about that
Title:  cursed baldric--in ambiguous words, it is true, but rather drolly
Title:  ambiguous.  Ah, cursed Gascon that I am, I get from one hobble
Title:  into another.  Friend d'Artagnan," continued he, speaking to
Title:  himself with all the amenity that he thought due himself, "if you
Title:  escape, of which there is not much chance, I would advise you to
Title:  practice perfect politeness for the future.  You must henceforth
Title:  be admired and quoted as a model of it.  To be obliging and
Title:  polite does not necessarily make a man a coward.  Look at Aramis,
Title:  now; Aramis is mildness and grace personified.  Well, did anybody
Title:  ever dream of calling Aramis a coward?  No, certainly not, and
Title:  from this moment I will endeavor to model myself after him.  Ah!
Title:  That's strange!  Here he is!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, walking and soliloquizing, had arrived within a few
Title:  steps of the hotel d'Arguillon and in front of that hotel
Title:  perceived Aramis, chatting gaily with three gentlemen; but as he
Title:  had not forgotten that it was in presence of this young man that
Title:  M. de Treville had been so angry in the morning, and as a witness
Title:  of the rebuke the Musketeers had received was not likely to be at
Title:  all agreeable, he pretended not to see him.  D'Artagnan, on the
Title:  contrary, quite full of his plans of conciliation and courtesy,
Title:  approached the young men with a profound bow, accompanied by a
Title:  most gracious smile.  All four, besides, immediately broke off
Title:  their conversation.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was not so dull as not to perceive that he was one too
Title:  many; but he was not sufficiently broken into the fashions of the
Title:  gay world to know how to extricate himself gallantly from a false
Title:  position, like that of a man who begins to mingle with people he
Title:  is scarcely acquainted with and in a conversation that does not
Title:  concern him.  He was seeking in his mind, then, for the least
Title:  awkward means of retreat, when he remarked that Aramis had let
Title:  his handkerchief fall, and by mistake, no doubt, had placed his
Title:  foot upon it.  This appeared to be a favorable opportunity to
Title:  repair his intrusion.  He stooped, and with the most gracious air
Title:  he could assume, drew the handkerchief from under the foot of the
Title:  Musketeer in spite of the efforts the latter made to detain it,
Title:  and holding it out to him, said, "I believe, monsieur, that this
Title:  is a handkerchief you would be sorry to lose?"
Title:  
Title:  The handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered, and had a coronet
Title:  and arms at one of its corners.  Aramis blushed excessively, and
Title:  snatched rather than took the handkerchief from the hand of the
Title:  Gascon.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" cried one of the Guards, "will you persist in saying,
Title:  most discreet Aramis, that you are not on good terms with Madame
Title:  de Bois-Tracy, when that gracious lady has the kindness to lend
Title:  you one of her handkerchiefs?"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis darted at d'Artagnan one of those looks which inform a man
Title:  that he has acquired a mortal enemy.  Then, resuming his mild
Title:  air, "You are deceived, gentlemen," said he, "this handkerchief
Title:  is not mine, and I cannot fancy why Monsieur has taken it into
Title:  his head to offer it to me rather than to one of you; and as a
Title:  proof of what I say, here is mine in my pocket."
Title:  
Title:  So saying, he pulled out his own handkerchief, likewise a very
Title:  elegant handkerchief, and of fine cambric--though cambric was
Title:  dear at the period--but a handkerchief without embroidery and
Title:  without arms, only ornamented with a single cipher, that of its
Title:  proprietor.
Title:  
Title:  This time d'Artagnan was not hasty.  He perceived his mistake;
Title:  but the friends of Aramis were not at all convinced by his
Title:  denial, and one of them addressed the young Musketeer with
Title:  affected seriousness.  "If it were as you pretend it is," said
Title:  he, "I should be forced, my dear Aramis, to reclaim it myself;
Title:  for, as you very well know, Bois-Tracy is an intimate friend of
Title:  mine, and I cannot allow the property of his wife to be sported
Title:  as a trophy."
Title:  
Title:  "You make the demand badly," replied Aramis; "and while
Title:  acknowledging the justice of your reclamation, I refuse it on
Title:  account of the form."
Title:  
Title:  "The fact is," hazarded d'Artagnan, timidly, "I did not see the
Title:  handkerchief fall from the pocket of Monsieur Aramis.  He had his
Title:  foot upon it, that is all; and I thought from having his foot
Title:  upon it the handkerchief was his."
Title:  
Title:  "And you were deceived, my dear sir," replied Aramis, coldly,
Title:  very little sensible to the reparation.  Then turning toward that
Title:  one of the guards who had declared himself the friend of Bois-
Title:  Tracy, "Besides," continued he, "I have reflected, my dear
Title:  intimate of Bois-Tracy, that I am not less tenderly his friend
Title:  than you can possibly be; so that decidedly this handkerchief is
Title:  as likely to have fallen from your pocket as mine."
Title:  
Title:  "No, upon my honor!" cried his Majesty's Guardsman.
Title:  
Title:  "You are about to swear upon your honor and I upon my word, and
Title:  then it will be pretty evident that one of us will have lied.
Title:  Now, here, Montaran, we will do better than that--let each take a
Title:  half."
Title:  
Title:  "Of the handkerchief?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Perfectly just," cried the other two Guardsmen, "the judgment of
Title:  King Solomon!  Aramis, you certainly are full of wisdom!"
Title:  
Title:  The young men burst into a laugh, and as may be supposed, the
Title:  affair had no other sequel.  In a moment or two the conversation
Title:  ceased, and the three Guardsmen and the Musketeer, after having
Title:  cordially shaken hands, separated, the Guardsmen going one way
Title:  and Aramis another.
Title:  
Title:  "Now is my time to make peace with this gallant man," said
Title:  d'Artagnan to himself, having stood on one side during the whole
Title:  of the latter part of the conversation; and with this good
Title:  feeling drawing near to Aramis, who was departing without paying
Title:  any attention to him, "Monsieur," said he, "you will excuse me, I
Title:  hope."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur," interrupted Aramis, "permit me to observe to you
Title:  that you have not acted in this affair as a gallant man ought."
Title:  
Title:  "What, monsieur!" cried d'Artagnan, "and do you suppose--"
Title:  
Title:  "I suppose, monsieur that you are not a fool, and that you knew
Title:  very well, although coming from Gascony, that people do not tread
Title:  upon handkerchiefs without a reason.  What the devil!  Paris is
Title:  not paved with cambric!"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, you act wrongly in endeavoring to mortify me," said
Title:  d'Artagnan, in whom the natural quarrelsome spirit began to speak
Title:  more loudly than his pacific resolutions.  "I am from Gascony, it
Title:  is true; and since you know it, there is no occasion to tell you
Title:  that Gascons are not very patient, so that when they have begged
Title:  to be excused once, were it even for a folly, they are convinced
Title:  that they have done already at least as much again as they ought
Title:  to have done."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, what I say to you about the matter," said Aramis, "is
Title:  not for the sake of seeking a quarrel.  Thank God, I am not a
Title:  bravo!  And being a Musketeer but for a time, I only fight when I
Title:  am forced to do so, and always with great repugnance; but this
Title:  time the affair is serious, for here is a lady compromised by
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "By US, you mean!" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Why did you so maladroitly restore me the handkerchief?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why did you so awkwardly let it fall?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have said, monsieur, and I repeat, that the handkerchief did
Title:  not fall from my pocket."
Title:  
Title:  "And thereby you have lied twice, monsieur, for I saw it fall."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you take it with that tone, do you, Master Gascon?  Well, I
Title:  will teach you how to behave yourself."
Title:  
Title:  "And I will send you back to your Mass book, Master Abbe.  Draw,
Title:  if you please, and instantly--"
Title:  
Title:  "Not so, if you please, my good friend--not here, at least.  Do
Title:  you not perceive that we are opposite the Hotel d'Arguillon,
Title:  which is full of the cardinal's creatures?  How do I know that
Title:  this is not his Eminence who has honored you with the commission
Title:  to procure my head?  Now, I entertain a ridiculous partiality for
Title:  my head, it seems to suit my shoulders so correctly.  I wish to
Title:  kill you, be at rest as to that, but to kill you quietly in a
Title:  snug, remote place, where you will not be able to boast of your
Title:  death to anybody."
Title:  
Title:  "I agree, monsieur; but do not be too confident.  Take your
Title:  handkerchief; whether it belongs to you or another, you may
Title:  perhaps stand in need of it."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur is a Gascon?" asked Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes.  Monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence?"
Title:  
Title:  "Prudence, monsieur, is a virtue sufficiently useless to
Title:  Musketeers, I know, but indispensable to churchmen; and as I am
Title:  only a Musketeer provisionally, I hold it good to be prudent.  At
Title:  two o'clock I shall have the honor of expecting you at the hotel
Title:  of Monsieur de Treville.  There I will indicate to you the best
Title:  place and time."
Title:  
Title:  The two young men bowed and separated, Aramis ascending the
Title:  street which led to the Luxembourg, while d'Artagnan, perceiving
Title:  the appointed hour was approaching, took the road to the
Title:  Carmes-Deschaux, saying to himself, "Decidedly I can't draw back;
Title:  but at least, if I am killed, I shall be killed by a Musketeer."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  5  THE KING'S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL'S GUARDS
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was acquainted with nobody in Paris.  He went
Title:  therefore to his appointment with Athos without a second,
Title:  determined to be satisfied with those his adversary should
Title:  choose.  Besides, his intention was formed to make the brave
Title:  Musketeer all suitable apologies, but without meanness or
Title:  weakness, fearing that might result from this duel which
Title:  generally results from an affair of this kind, when a young and
Title:  vigorous man fights with an adversary who is wounded and
Title:  weakened--if conquered, he doubles the triumph of his antagonist;
Title:  if a conqueror, he is accused of foul play and want of courage.
Title:  
Title:  Now, we must have badly painted the character of our adventure
Title:  seeker, or our readers must have already perceived that
Title:  d'Artagnan was not an ordinary man; therefore, while repeating to
Title:  himself that his death was inevitable, he did not make up his
Title:  mind to die quietly, as one less courageous and less restrained
Title:  might have done in his place.  He reflected upon the different
Title:  characters of men he had to fight with, and began to view his
Title:  situation more clearly.  He hoped, by means of loyal excuses, to
Title:  make a friend of Athos, whose lordly air and austere bearing
Title:  pleased him much.  He flattered himself he should be able to
Title:  frighten Porthos with the adventure of the baldric, which he
Title:  might, if not killed upon the spot, relate to everybody a recital
Title:  which, well managed, would cover Porthos with ridicule.  As to
Title:  the astute Aramis, he did not entertain much dread of him; and
Title:  supposing he should be able to get so far, he determined to
Title:  dispatch him in good style or at least, by hitting him in the
Title:  face, as Caesar recommended his soldiers do to those of Pompey,
Title:  to damage forever the beauty of which he was so proud.
Title:  
Title:  In addition to this, d'Artagnan possessed that invincible stock
Title:  of resolution which the counsels of his father had implanted in
Title:  his heart: "Endure nothing from anyone but the king, the
Title:  cardinal, and Monsieur de Treville."  He flew, then, rather than
Title:  walked, toward the convent of the Carmes Dechausses, or rather
Title:  Deschaux, as it was called at that period, a sort of building
Title:  without a window, surrounded by barren fields--an accessory to
Title:  the Preaux-Clercs, and which was generally employed as the place
Title:  for the duels of men who had no time to lose.
Title:  
Title:  When d'Artagnan arrived in sight of the bare spot of ground which
Title:  extended along the foot of the monastery, Athos had been waiting
Title:  about five minutes, and twelve o'clock was striking.  He was,
Title:  then, as punctual as the Samaritan woman, and the most rigorous
Title:  casuist with regard to duels could have nothing to say.
Title:  
Title:  Athos, who still suffered grievously from his wound, though it
Title:  had been dressed anew by M. de Treville's surgeon, was seated on
Title:  a post and waiting for his adversary with hat in hand, his
Title:  feather even touching the ground.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said Athos, "I have engaged two of my friends as
Title:  seconds; but these two friends are not yet come, at which I am
Title:  astonished, as it is not at all their custom."
Title:  
Title:  "I have no seconds on my part, monsieur," said d'Artagnan; "for
Title:  having only arrived yesterday in Paris, I as yet know no one but
Title:  Monsieur de Treville, to whom I was recommended by my father, who
Title:  has the honor to be, in some degree, one of his friends."
Title:  
Title:  Athos reflected for an instant.  "You know no one but Monsieur de
Title:  Treville?" he asked.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur, I know only him."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but then," continued Athos, speaking half to himself, "if
Title:  I kill you, I shall have the air of a boy-slayer."
Title:  
Title:  "Not too much so," replied d'Artagnan, with a bow that was not
Title:  deficient in dignity, "since you do me the honor to draw a sword
Title:  with me while suffering from a wound which is very inconvenient."
Title:  
Title:  "Very inconvenient, upon my word; and you hurt me devilishly, I
Title:  can tell you.  But I will take the left hand--it is my custom in
Title:  such circumstances.  Do not fancy that I do you a favor; I use
Title:  either hand easily.  And it will be even a disadvantage to you; a
Title:  left-handed man is very troublesome to people who are not
Title:  prepared for it.  I regret I did not inform you sooner of this
Title:  circumstance."
Title:  
Title:  "You have truly, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, bowing again, "a
Title:  courtesy, for which, I assure you, I am very grateful."
Title:  
Title:  "You confuse me," replied Athos, with his gentlemanly air; "let
Title:  us talk of something else, if you please.  Ah, s'blood, how you
Title:  have hurt me!  My shoulder quite burns."
Title:  
Title:  "If you would permit me--" said d'Artagnan, with timidity.
Title:  
Title:  "What, monsieur?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have a miraculous balsam for wounds--a balsam given to me by
Title:  my mother and of which I have made a trial upon myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I am sure that in less than three days this balsam would
Title:  cure you; and at the end of three days, when you would be cured--
Title:  well, sir, it would still do me a great honor to be your man."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan spoke these words with a simplicity that did honor to
Title:  his courtesy, without throwing the least doubt upon his courage.
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU, monsieur!" said Athos, "that's a proposition that
Title:  pleases me; not that I can accept it, but a league off it savors
Title:  of the gentleman.  Thus spoke and acted the gallant knights of
Title:  the time of Charlemagne, in whom every cavalier ought to seek his
Title:  model.  Unfortunately, we do not live in the times of the great
Title:  emperor, we live in the times of the cardinal; and three days
Title:  hence, however well the secret might be guarded, it would be
Title:  known, I say, that we were to fight, and our combat would be
Title:  prevented.  I think these fellows will never come."
Title:  
Title:  "If you are in haste, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, with the same
Title:  simplicity with which a moment before he had proposed to him to
Title:  put off the duel for three days, "and if it be your will to
Title:  dispatch me at once, do not inconvenience yourself, I pray you."
Title:  
Title:  "There is another word which pleases me," cried Athos, with a
Title:  gracious nod to d'Artagnan.  "That did not come from a man
Title:  without a heart.  Monsieur, I love men of your kidney; and I
Title:  foresee plainly that if we don't kill each other, I shall
Title:  hereafter have much pleasure in your conversation.  We will wait
Title:  for these gentlemen, so please you; I have plenty of time, and it
Title:  will be more correct.  Ah, here is one of them, I believe."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, at the end of the Rue Vaugirard the gigantic Porthos
Title:  appeared.
Title:  
Title:  "What!" cried d'Artagnan, "is your first witness Monsieur
Title:  Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that disturbs you?"
Title:  
Title:  "By no means."
Title:  
Title:  "And here is the second."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan turned in the direction pointed to by Athos, and
Title:  perceived Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "What!" cried he, in an accent of greater astonishment than
Title:  before, "your second witness is Monsieur Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "Doubtless!  Are you not aware that we are never seen one without
Title:  the others, and that we are called among the Musketeers and the
Title:  Guards, at court and in the city, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, or
Title:  the Three Inseparables?  And yet, as you come from Dax or Pau--"
Title:  
Title:  "From Tarbes," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "It is probable you are ignorant of this little fact," said
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!" replied d'Artagnan, "you are well named, gentlemen;
Title:  and my adventure, if it should make any noise, will prove at
Title:  least that your union is not founded upon contrasts."
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, Porthos had come up, waved his hand to Athos,
Title:  and then turning toward d'Artagnan, stood quite astonished.
Title:  
Title:  Let us say in passing that he had changed his baldric and
Title:  relinquished his cloak.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said he, "what does this mean?"
Title:  
Title:  "This is the gentleman I am going to fight with," said Athos,
Title:  pointing to d'Artagnan with his hand and saluting him with the
Title:  same gesture.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, it is with him I am also going to fight," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "But not before one o'clock," replied d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "And I also am to fight with this gentleman," said Aramis, coming
Title:  in his turn onto the place.
Title:  
Title:  "But not until two o'clock," said d'Artagnan, with the same
Title:  calmness.
Title:  
Title:  "But what are you going to fight about, Athos?" asked Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Faith! I don't very well know.  He hurt my shoulder.  And you,
Title:  Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "Faith!  I am going to fight--because I am going to fight,"
Title:  answered Porthos, reddening.
Title:  
Title:  Athos, whose keen eye lost nothing, perceived a faintly sly smile
Title:  pass over the lips of the young Gascon as he replied, "We had a
Title:  short discussion upon dress."
Title:  
Title:  "And you, Aramis?" asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, ours is a theological quarrel," replied Aramis, making a
Title:  sign to d'Artagnan to keep secret the cause of their duel.
Title:  
Title:  Athos indeed saw a second smile on the lips of d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; a passage of St. Augustine, upon which we could not agree,"
Title:  said the Gascon.
Title:  
Title:  "Decidedly, this is a clever fellow," murmured Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "And now you are assembled, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "permit
Title:  me to offer you my apologies."
Title:  
Title:  At this word APOLOGIES, a cloud passed over the brow of Athos, a
Title:  haughty smile curled the lip of Porthos, and a negative sign was
Title:  the reply of Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "You do not understand me, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, throwing
Title:  up his head, the sharp and bold lines of which were at the moment
Title:  gilded by a bright ray of the sun.  "I asked to be excused in
Title:  case I should not be able to discharge my debt to all three; for
Title:  Monsieur Athos has the right to kill me first, which must much diminish
Title:  the face-value of your bill, Monsieur Porthos, and render
Title:  yours almost null, Monsieur Aramis.  And now, gentlemen, I
Title:  repeat, excuse me, but on that account only, and--on guard!"
Title:  
Title:  At these words, with the most gallant air possible, d'Artagnan
Title:  drew his sword.
Title:  
Title:  The blood had mounted to the head of d'Artagnan, and at that
Title:  moment he would have drawn his sword against all the Musketeers
Title:  in the kingdom as willingly as he now did against Athos, Porthos,
Title:  and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  It was a quarter past midday.  The sun was in its zenith, and the
Title:  spot chosen for the scene of the duel was exposed to its full
Title:  ardor.
Title:  
Title:  "It is very hot," said Athos, drawing his sword in its turn, "and
Title:  yet I cannot take off my doublet; for I just now felt my wound
Title:  begin to bleed again, and I should not like to annoy Monsieur
Title:  with the sight of blood which he has not drawn from me himself."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true, Monsieur," replied d'Artagnan, "and whether drawn
Title:  by myself or another, I assure you I shall always view with
Title:  regret the blood of so brave a gentleman.  I will therefore fight
Title:  in my doublet, like yourself."
Title:  
Title:  "Come, come, enough of such compliments!" cried Porthos.
Title:  "Remember, we are waiting for our turns."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak for yourself when you are inclined to utter such
Title:  incongruities," interrupted Aramis.  "For my part, I think what
Title:  they say is very well said, and quite worthy of two gentlemen."
Title:  
Title:  "When you please, monsieur," said Athos, putting himself on
Title:  guard.
Title:  
Title:  "I waited your orders," said d'Artagnan, crossing swords.
Title:  
Title:  But scarcely had the two rapiers clashed, when a company of the
Title:  Guards of his Eminence, commanded by M. de Jussac, turned the
Title:  corner of the convent.
Title:  
Title:  "The cardinal's Guards!" cried Aramis and Porthos at the same
Title:  time.  "Sheathe your swords, gentlemen, sheathe your swords!"
Title:  
Title:  But it was too late.  The two combatants had been seen in a
Title:  position which left no doubt of their intentions.
Title:  
Title:  "Halloo!" cried Jussac, advancing toward them and making a sign
Title:  to his men to do so likewise, "halloo, Musketeers?  Fighting
Title:  here, are you?  And the edicts?  What is become of them?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are very generous, gentlemen of the Guards," said Athos,
Title:  full of rancor, for Jussac was one of the aggressors of the
Title:  preceding day.  "If we were to see you fighting, I can assure you
Title:  that we would make no effort to prevent you.  Leave us alone,
Title:  then, and you will enjoy a little amusement without cost to
Title:  yourselves."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Jussac, "it is with great regret that I
Title:  pronounce the thing impossible.  Duty before everything.
Title:  Sheathe, then, if you please, and follow us."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said Aramis, parodying Jussac, "it would afford us
Title:  great pleasure to obey your polite invitation if it depended upon
Title:  ourselves; but unfortunately the thing is impossible--Monsieur de
Title:  Treville has forbidden it.  Pass on your way, then; it is the
Title:  best thing to do."
Title:  
Title:  This raillery exasperated Jussac.  "We will charge upon you,
Title:  then," said he, "if you disobey."
Title:  
Title:  "There are five of them," said Athos, half aloud, "and we are but
Title:  three; we shall be beaten again, and must die on the spot, for,
Title:  on my part, I declare I will never appear again before the
Title:  captain as a conquered man."
Title:  
Title:  Athos, Porthos, and Aramis instantly drew near one another, while
Title:  Jussac drew up his soldiers.
Title:  
Title:  This short interval was sufficient to determine d'Artagnan on the
Title:  part he was to take.  It was one of those events which decide the
Title:  life of a man; it was a choice between the king and the
Title:  cardinal--the choice made, it must be persisted in.  To fight,
Title:  that was to disobey the law, that was to risk his head, that was
Title:  to make at one blow an enemy of a minister more powerful than the
Title:  king himself.  All this young man perceived, and yet, to his
Title:  praise we speak it, he did not hesitate a second.  Turning
Title:  towards Athos and his friends, "Gentlemen," said he, "allow me to
Title:  correct your words, if you please.  You said you were but three,
Title:  but it appears to me we are four."
Title:  
Title:  "But you are not one of us," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," replied d'Artagnan; "I have not the uniform, but I
Title:  have the spirit.  My heart is that of a Musketeer; I feel it,
Title:  monsieur, and that impels me on."
Title:  
Title:  "Withdraw, young man," cried Jussac, who doubtless, by his
Title:  gestures and the expression of his countenance, had guessed
Title:  d'Artagnan's design.  "You may retire; we consent to that.  Save
Title:  your skin; begone quickly."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan did not budge.
Title:  
Title:  "Decidedly, you are a brave fellow," said Athos, pressing the
Title:  young man's hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, come, choose your part," replied Jussac.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Porthos to Aramis, "we must do something."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur is full of generosity," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  But all three reflected upon the youth of d'Artagnan, and dreaded
Title:  his inexperience.
Title:  
Title:  "We should only be three, one of whom is wounded, with the
Title:  addition of a boy," resumed Athos; "and yet it will not be the
Title:  less said we were four men."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but to yield!" said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "That IS difficult," replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan comprehended their irresolution.
Title:  
Title:  "Try me, gentlemen," said he, "and I swear to you by my honor
Title:  that I will not go hence if we are conquered."
Title:  
Title:  "What is your name, my brave fellow?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, Athos, Porthos, Aramis, and d'Artagnan, forward!"
Title:  cried Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, gentlemen, have you decided?" cried Jussac for the third
Title:  time.
Title:  
Title:  "It is done, gentlemen," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "And what is your choice?" asked Jussac.
Title:  
Title:  "We are about to have the honor of charging you," replied Aramis,
Title:  lifting his hat with one hand and drawing his sword with the
Title:  other.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah! You resist, do you?" cried Jussac.
Title:  
Title:  "S'blood; does that astonish you?"
Title:  
Title:  And the nine combatants rushed upon each other with a fury which
Title:  however did not exclude a certain degree of method.
Title:  
Title:  Athos fixed upon a certain Cahusac, a favorite of the cardinal's.
Title:  Porthos had Bicarat, and Aramis found himself opposed to two
Title:  adversaries.  As to d'Artagnan, he sprang toward Jussac himself.
Title:  
Title:  The heart of the young Gascon beat as if it would burst through
Title:  his side--not from fear, God he thanked, he had not the shade of
Title:  it, but with emulation; he fought like a furious tiger, turning
Title:  ten times round his adversary, and changing his ground and his
Title:  guard twenty times.  Jussac was, as was then said, a fine blade,
Title:  and had had much practice; nevertheless it required all his skill
Title:  to defend himself against an adversary who, active and energetic,
Title:  departed every instant from received rules, attacking him on all
Title:  sides at once, and yet parrying like a man who had the greatest
Title:  respect for his own epidermis.
Title:  
Title:  This contest at length exhausted Jussac's patience.  Furious at
Title:  being held in check by one whom he had considered a boy, he
Title:  became warm and began to make mistakes.  D'Artagnan, who though
Title:  wanting in practice had a sound theory, redoubled his agility.
Title:  Jussac, anxious to put an end to this, springing forward, aimed a
Title:  terrible thrust at his adversary, but the latter parried it; and
Title:  while Jussac was recovering himself, glided like a serpent
Title:  beneath his blade, and passed his sword through his body.  Jussac
Title:  fell like a dead mass.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan then cast an anxious and rapid glance over the field
Title:  of battle.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis had killed one of his adversaries, but the other pressed
Title:  him warmly.  Nevertheless, Aramis was in a good situation, and
Title:  able to defend himself.
Title:  
Title:  Bicarat and Porthos had just made counterhits.  Porthos had
Title:  received a thrust through his arm, and Bicarat one through his
Title:  thigh.  But neither of these two wounds was serious, and they
Title:  only fought more earnestly.
Title:  
Title:  Athos, wounded anew by Cahusac, became evidently paler, but did
Title:  not give way a foot.  He only changed his sword hand, and fought
Title:  with his left hand.
Title:  
Title:  According to the laws of dueling at that period, d'Artagnan was
Title:  at liberty to assist whom he pleased.  While he was endeavoring
Title:  to find out which of his companions stood in greatest need, he
Title:  caught a glance from Athos.  The glance was of sublime eloquence.
Title:  Athos would have died rather than appeal for help; but he could
Title:  look, and with that look ask assistance.  D'Artagnan interpreted
Title:  it; with a terrible bound he sprang to the side of Cahusac,
Title:  crying, "To me, Monsieur Guardsman; I will slay you!"
Title:  
Title:  Cahusac turned.  It was time; for Athos, whose great courage
Title:  alone supported him, sank upon his knee.
Title:  
Title:  "S'blood!" cried he to d'Artagnan, "do not kill him, young man, I
Title:  beg of you.  I have an old affair to settle with him when I am
Title:  cured and sound again.  Disarm him only--make sure of his sword.
Title:  That's it!  Very well done!"
Title:  
Title:  The exclamation was drawn from Athos by seeing the sword of
Title:  Cahusac fly twenty paces from him.  D'Artagnan and Cahusac sprang
Title:  forward at the same instant, the one to recover, the other to
Title:  obtain, the sword; but d'Artagnan, being the more active, reached
Title:  it first and placed his foot upon it.
Title:  
Title:  Cahusac immediately ran to the Guardsman whom Aramis had killed,
Title:  seized his rapier, and returned toward d'Artagnan; but on his way
Title:  he met Athos, who during his relief which d'Artagnan had procured
Title:  him had recovered his breath, and who, for fear that d'Artagnan
Title:  would kill his enemy, wished to resume the fight.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan perceived that it would be disobliging Athos not to
Title:  leave him alone; and in a few minutes Cahusac fell, with a sword
Title:  thrust through his throat.
Title:  
Title:  At the same instant Aramis placed his sword point on the breast
Title:  of his fallen enemy, and forced him to ask for mercy.
Title:  
Title:  There only then remained Porthos and Bicarat.  Porthos made a
Title:  thousand flourishes, asking Bicarat what o'clock it could be, and
Title:  offering him his compliments upon his brother's having just
Title:  obtained a company in the regiment of Navarre; but, jest as he
Title:  might, he gained nothing.  Bicarat was one of those iron men who
Title:  never fell dead.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, it was necessary to finish.  The watch might come
Title:  up and take all the combatants, wounded or not, royalists or
Title:  cardinalists.  Athos, Aramis, and d'Artagnan surrounded Bicarat,
Title:  and required him to surrender.  Though alone against all and with
Title:  a wound in his thigh, Bicarat wished to hold out; but Jussac, who
Title:  had risen upon his elbow, cried out to him to yield.  Bicarat was
Title:  a Gascon, as d'Artagnan was; he turned a deaf ear, and contented
Title:  himself with laughing, and between two parries finding time to
Title:  point to a spot of earth with his sword, "Here," cried he,
Title:  parodying a verse of the Bible, "here will Bicarat die; for I
Title:  only am left, and they seek my life."
Title:  
Title:  "But there are four against you; leave off, I command you."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, if you command me, that's another thing," said Bicarat.  "As
Title:  you are my commander, it is my duty to obey."  And springing
Title:  backward, he broke his sword across his knee to avoid the
Title:  necessity of surrendering it, threw the pieces over the convent
Title:  wall, and crossed him arms, whistling a cardinalist air.
Title:  
Title:  Bravery is always respected, even in an enemy.  The Musketeers
Title:  saluted Bicarat with their swords, and returned them to their
Title:  sheaths.  D'Artagnan did the same.  Then, assisted by Bicarat,
Title:  the only one left standing, he bore Jussac, Cahusac, and one of
Title:  Aramis's adversaries who was only wounded, under the porch of the
Title:  convent.  The fourth, as we have said, was dead.  They then rang
Title:  the bell, and carrying away four swords out of five, they took
Title:  their road, intoxicated with joy, toward the hotel of M. de
Title:  Treville.
Title:  
Title:  They walked arm in arm, occupying the whole width of the street
Title:  and taking in every Musketeer they met, so that in the end it
Title:  became a triumphal march.  The heart of d'Artagnan swam in
Title:  delirium; he marched between Athos and Porthos, pressing them
Title:  tenderly.
Title:  
Title:  "If I am not yet a Musketeer," said he to his new friends, as he
Title:  passed through the gateway of M. de Treville's hotel, "at least I
Title:  have entered upon my apprenticeship, haven't I?"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  6  HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XIII
Title:  
Title:  This affair made a great noise.  M. de Treville scolded his
Title:  Musketeers in public, and congratulated them in private; but as
Title:  no time was to be lost in gaining the king, M. de Treville
Title:  hastened to report himself at the Louvre.  It was already too
Title:  late.  The king was closeted with the cardinal, and M. de
Title:  Treville was informed that the king was busy and could not
Title:  receive him at that moment.  In the evening M. de Treville
Title:  attended the king's gaming table.  The king was winning; and as
Title:  he was very avaricious, he was in an excellent humor.  Perceiving
Title:  M. de Treville at a distance--
Title:  
Title:  "Come here, Monsieur Captain," said he, "come here, that I may
Title:  growl at you.  Do you know that his Eminence has been making
Title:  fresh complaints against your Musketeers, and that with so much
Title:  emotion, that this evening his Eminence is indisposed?  Ah, these
Title:  Musketeers of yours are very devils--fellows to be hanged."
Title:  
Title:  "No, sire," replied Treville, who saw at the first glance how
Title:  things would go, "on the contrary, they are good creatures, as
Title:  meek as lambs, and have but one desire, I'll be their warranty.
Title:  And that is that their swords may never leave their scabbards but
Title:  in your majesty's service.  But what are they to do?  The Guards
Title:  of Monsieur the Cardinal are forever seeking quarrels with them,
Title:  and for the honor of the corps even, the poor young men are
Title:  obliged to defend themselves."
Title:  
Title:  "Listen to Monsieur de Treville," said the king; "listen to him!
Title:  Would not one say he was speaking of a religious community?  In
Title:  truth, my dear Captain, I have a great mind to take away your
Title:  commission and give it to Mademoiselle de Chemerault, to whom I
Title:  promised an abbey.  But don't fancy that I am going to take you
Title:  on your bare word.  I am called Louis the Just, Monsieur de
Title:  Treville, and by and by, by and by we will see."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, sire; it is because I confide in that justice that I shall
Title:  wait patiently and quietly the good pleasure of your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Wait, then, monsieur, wait," said the king; "I will not detain
Title:  you long."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, fortune changed; and as the king began to lose what he
Title:  had won, he was not sorry to find an excuse for playing
Title:  Charlemagne--if we may use a gaming phrase of whose origin we
Title:  confess our ignorance.  The king therefore arose a minute after,
Title:  and putting the money which lay before him into his pocket, the
Title:  major part of which arose from his winnings, "La Vieuville," said
Title:  he, "take my place; I must speak to Monsieur de Treville on an
Title:  affair of importance.  Ah, I had eighty louis before me; put down
Title:  the same sum, so that they who have lost may have nothing to
Title:  complain of.  Justice before everything."
Title:  
Title:  Then turning toward M. de Treville and walking with him toward
Title:  the embrasure of a window, "Well, monsieur," continued he, "you
Title:  say it is his Eminence's Guards who have sought a quarrel with
Title:  your Musketeers?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire, as they always do."
Title:  
Title:  "And how did the thing happen?  Let us see, for you know, my dear
Title:  Captain, a judge must hear both sides."
Title:  
Title:  "Good Lord!  In the most simple and natural manner possible.
Title:  Three of my best soldiers, whom your Majesty knows by name, and
Title:  whose devotedness you have more than once appreciated, and who
Title:  have, I dare affirm to the king, his service much at heart--three
Title:  of my best soldiers, I say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, had made
Title:  a party of pleasure with a young fellow from Gascony, whom I had
Title:  introduced to them the same morning.  The party was to take place
Title:  at St. Germain, I believe, and they had appointed to meet at the
Title:  Carmes-Deschaux, when they were disturbed by de Jussac, Cahusac,
Title:  Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did not go there
Title:  in such a numerous company without some ill intention against the
Title:  edicts."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!  You incline me to think so," said the king.  "There is
Title:  no doubt they went thither to fight themselves."
Title:  
Title:  "I do not accuse them, sire; but I leave your Majesty to judge
Title:  what five armed men could possibly be going to do in such a
Title:  deserted place as the neighborhood of the Convent des Carmes."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, you are right, Treville, you are right!"
Title:  
Title:  "Then, upon seeing my Musketeers they changed their minds, and
Title:  forgot their private hatred for partisan hatred; for your Majesty
Title:  cannot be ignorant that the Musketeers, who belong to the king
Title:  and nobody but the king, are the natural enemies of the
Title:  Guardsmen, who belong to the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, Treville, yes," said the king, in a melancholy tone; "and
Title:  it is very sad, believe me, to see thus two parties in France,
Title:  two heads to royalty. But all this will come to an end, Treville,
Title:  will come to an end.  You say, then, that the Guardsmen sought a
Title:  quarrel with the Musketeers?"
Title:  
Title:  "I say that it is probable that things have fallen out so, but I
Title:  will not swear to it, sire.  You know how difficult it is to
Title:  discover the truth; and unless a man be endowed with that
Title:  admirable instinct which causes Louis XIII to be named the
Title:  Just--"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "You are right, Treville; but they were not alone, your
Title:  Musketeers.  They had a youth with them?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire, and one wounded man; so that three of the king's
Title:  Musketeers--one of whom was wounded--and a youth not only
Title:  maintained their ground against five of the most terrible of the
Title:  cardinal's Guardsmen, but absolutely brought four of them to
Title:  earth."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, this is a victory!" cried the king, all radiant, "a
Title:  complete victory!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire; as complete as that of the Bridge of Ce."
Title:  
Title:  "Four men, one of them wounded, and a youth, say you?"
Title:  
Title:  "One hardly a young man; but who, however, behaved himself so
Title:  admirably on this occasion that I will take the liberty of
Title:  recommending him to your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "How does he call himself?"
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan, sire; he is the son of one of my oldest friends--the
Title:  son of a man who served under the king your father, of glorious
Title:  memory, in the civil war."
Title:  
Title:  "And you say this young man behaved himself well?  Tell me how,
Title:  Treville--you know how I delight in accounts of war and
Title:  fighting."
Title:  
Title:  And Louis XIII twisted his mustache proudly, placing his hand
Title:  upon his hip.
Title:  
Title:  "Sire," resumed Treville, "as I told you, Monsieur d'Artagnan is
Title:  little more than a boy; and as he has not the honor of being a
Title:  Musketeer, he was dressed as a citizen.  The Guards of the
Title:  cardinal, perceiving his youth and that he did not belong to the
Title:  corps, invited him to retire before they attacked."
Title:  
Title:  "So you may plainly see, Treville," interrupted the king, "it was
Title:  they who attacked?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is true, sire; there can be no more doubt on that head.
Title:  They called upon him then to retire; but he answered that he was
Title:  a Musketeer at heart, entirely devoted to your Majesty, and that
Title:  therefore he would remain with Messieurs the Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  "Brave young man!" murmured the king.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, he did remain with them; and your Majesty has in him so
Title:  firm a champion that it was he who gave Jussac the terrible sword
Title:  thrust which has made the cardinal so angry."
Title:  
Title:  "He who wounded Jussac!" cried the king, "he, a boy!  Treville,
Title:  that's impossible!"
Title:  
Title:  "It is as I have the honor to relate it to your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "Jussac, one of the first swordsmen in the kingdom?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, sire, for once he found his master."
Title:  
Title:  "I will see this young man, Treville--I will see him; and if anything
Title:  can be done--well, we will make it our business."
Title:  
Title:  "When will your Majesty deign to receive him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow, at midday, Treville."
Title:  
Title:  "Shall I bring him alone?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, bring me all four together.  I wish to thank them all at
Title:  once.  Devoted men are so rare, Treville, by the back staircase.
Title:  It is useless to let the cardinal know."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "You understand, Treville--an edict is still an edict, it is
Title:  forbidden to fight, after all."
Title:  
Title:  "But this encounter, sire, is quite out of the ordinary
Title:  conditions of a duel.  It is a brawl; and the proof is that there
Title:  were five of the cardinal's Guardsmen against my three Musketeers
Title:  and Monsieur d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true," said the king; "but never mind, Treville, come
Title:  still by the back staircase."
Title:  
Title:  Treville smiled; but as it was indeed something to have prevailed
Title:  upon this child to rebel against his master, he saluted the king
Title:  respectfully, and with this agreement, took leave of him.
Title:  
Title:  That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honor
Title:  accorded them.  As they had long been acquainted with the king,
Title:  they were not much excited; but d'Artagnan, with his Gascon
Title:  imagination, saw in it his future fortune, and passed the night
Title:  in golden dreams.  By eight o'clock in the morning he was at the
Title:  apartment of Athos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan found the Musketeer dressed and ready to go out.  As
Title:  the hour to wait upon the king was not till twelve, he had made a
Title:  party with Porthos and Aramis to play a game at tennis in a
Title:  tennis court situated near the stables of the Luxembourg.  Athos
Title:  invited d'Artagnan to follow them; and although ignorant of the
Title:  game, which he had never played, he accepted, not knowing what to
Title:  do with his time from nine o'clock in the morning, as it then
Title:  scarcely was, till twelve.
Title:  
Title:  The two Musketeers were already there, and were playing together.
Title:  Athos, who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed with
Title:  d'Artagnan to the opposite side and challenged them; but at the
Title:  first effort he made, although he played with his left hand, he
Title:  found that his wound was yet too recent to allow of such
Title:  exertion.  D'Artagnan remained, therefore, alone; and as he
Title:  declared he was too ignorant of the game to play it regularly
Title:  they only continued giving balls to one another without counting.
Title:  But one of these balls, launched by Porthos' herculean hand,
Title:  passed so close to d'Artagnan's face that he thought that if,
Title:  instead of passing near, it had hit him, his audience would have
Title:  been probably lost, as it would have been impossible for him to
Title:  present himself before the king.  Now, as upon this audience, in
Title:  his Gascon imagination, depended his future life, he saluted
Title:  Aramis and Porthos politely, declaring that he would not resume
Title:  the game until he should be prepared to play with them on more
Title:  equal terms, and went and took his place near the cord and in the
Title:  gallery.
Title:  
Title:  Unfortunately for d'Artagnan, among the spectators was one of his
Title:  Eminence's Guardsmen, who, still irritated by the defeat of his
Title:  companions, which had happened only the day before, had promised
Title:  himself to seize the first opportunity of avenging it.  He
Title:  believed this opportunity was now come and addressed his
Title:  neighbor:  "It is not astonishing that that young man should be
Title:  afraid of a ball, for he is doubtless a Musketeer apprentice."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him, and fixed
Title:  his eyes intensely upon the Guardsman who had just made this
Title:  insolent speech.
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU," resumed the latter, twisting his mustache, "look at me
Title:  as long as you like, my little gentleman!  I have said what I
Title:  have said."
Title:  
Title:  "And as since that which you have said is too clear to require
Title:  any explanation," replied d'Artagnan, in a low voice, "I beg you
Title:  to follow me."
Title:  
Title:  "And when?" asked the Guardsman, with the same jeering air.
Title:  
Title:  "At once, if you please."
Title:  
Title:  "And you know who I am, without doubt?"
Title:  
Title:  "I?  I am completely ignorant; nor does it much disquiet me."
Title:  
Title:  "You're in the wrong there; for if you knew my name, perhaps you
Title:  would not be so pressing."
Title:  
Title:  "What is your name?"
Title:  
Title:  "Bernajoux, at your service."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, Monsieur Bernajoux," said d'Artagnan, tranquilly, "I
Title:  will wait for you at the door."
Title:  
Title:  "Go, monsieur, I will follow you."
Title:  
Title:  "Do not hurry yourself, monsieur, lest it be observed that we go
Title:  out together.  You must be aware that for our undertaking,
Title:  company would be in the way."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said the Guardsman, astonished that his name had
Title:  not produced more effect upon the young man.
Title:  
Title:  Indeed, the name of Bernajoux was known to all the world,
Title:  d'Artagnan alone excepted, perhaps; for it was one of those which
Title:  figured most frequently in the daily brawls which all the edicts
Title:  of the cardinal could not repress.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis were so engaged with their game, and Athos was
Title:  watching them with so much attention, that they did not even
Title:  perceive their young companion go out, who, as he had told the
Title:  Guardsman of his Eminence, stopped outside the door.  An instant
Title:  after, the Guardsman descended in his turn.  As d'Artagnan had no
Title:  time to lose, on account of the audience of the king, which was
Title:  fixed for midday, he cast his eyes around, and seeing that the
Title:  street was empty, said to his adversary, "My faith!  It is
Title:  fortunate for you, although your name is Bernajoux, to have only
Title:  to deal with an apprentice Musketeer.  Never mind; be content, I
Title:  will do my best.  On guard!"
Title:  
Title:  "But," said he whom d'Artagnan thus provoked, "it appears to me
Title:  that this place is badly chosen, and that we should be better
Title:  behind the Abbey St. Germain or in the Pre-aux-Clercs."
Title:  
Title:  "What you say is full of sense," replied d'Artagnan; "but
Title:  unfortunately I have very little time to spare, having an
Title:  appointment at twelve precisely.  On guard, then, monsieur, on
Title:  guard!"
Title:  
Title:  Bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment paid to him
Title:  twice.  In an instant his sword glittered in his hand, and he
Title:  sprang upon his adversary, whom, thanks to his great
Title:  youthfulness, he hoped to intimidate.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan had on the preceding day served his
Title:  apprenticeship.  Fresh sharpened by his victory, full of hopes of
Title:  future favor, he was resolved not to recoil a step.  So the two
Title:  swords were crossed close to the hilts, and as d'Artagnan stood
Title:  firm, it was his adversary who made the retreating step; but
Title:  d'Artagnan seized the moment at which, in this movement, the
Title:  sword of Bernajoux deviated from the line.  He freed his weapon,
Title:  made a lunge, and touched his adversary on the shoulder.
Title:  d'Artagnan immediately made a step backward and raised his sword;
Title:  but Bernajoux cried out that it was nothing, and rushing blindly
Title:  upon him, absolutely spitted himself upon d'Artagnan's sword.
Title:  As, however, he did not fall, as he did not declare himself
Title:  conquered, but only broke away toward the hotel of M. de la
Title:  Tremouille, in whose service he had a relative, d'Artagnan was
Title:  ignorant of the seriousness of the last wound his adversary had
Title:  received, and pressing him warmly, without doubt would soon have
Title:  completed his work with a third blow, when the noise which arose
Title:  from the street being heard in the tennis court, two of the
Title:  friends of the Guardsman, who had seen him go out after
Title:  exchanging some words with d'Artagnan, rushed, sword in hand,
Title:  from the court, and fell upon the conqueror.  But Athos, Porthos,
Title:  and Aramis quickly appeared in their turn, and the moment the two
Title:  Guardsmen attacked their young companion, drove them back.
Title:  Bernajoux now fell, and as the Guardsmen were only two against
Title:  four, they began to cry, "To the rescue!  The Hotel de la
Title:  Tremouille!"  At these cries, all who were in the hotel rushed
Title:  out and fell upon the four companions, who on their side cried
Title:  aloud, "To the rescue, Musketeers!"
Title:  
Title:  This cry was generally heeded; for the Musketeers were known to
Title:  be enemies of the cardinal, and were beloved on account of the
Title:  hatred they bore to his Eminence.  Thus the soldiers of other
Title:  companies than those which belonged to the Red Duke, as Aramis
Title:  had called him, often took part with the king's Musketeers in
Title:  these quarrels.  Of three Guardsmen of the company of M.
Title:  Dessessart who were passing, two came to the assistance of the
Title:  four companions, while the other ran toward the hotel of M. de
Title:  Treville, crying, "To the rescue, Musketeers!  To the rescue!"
Title:  As usual, this hotel was full of soldiers of this company, who
Title:  hastened to the succor of their comrades.  The MELEE became
Title:  general, but strength was on the side of the Musketeers.  The
Title:  cardinal's Guards and M. de la Tremouille's people retreated into
Title:  the hotel, the doors of which they closed just in time to prevent
Title:  their enemies from entering with them.  As to the wounded man, he
Title:  had been taken in at once, and, as we have said, in a very bad
Title:  state.
Title:  
Title:  Excitement was at its height among the Musketeers and their
Title:  allies, and they even began to deliberate whether they should not
Title:  set fire to the hotel to punish the insolence of M. de la
Title:  Tremouille's domestics in daring to make a SORTIE upon the king's
Title:  Musketeers.  The proposition had been made, and received with
Title:  enthusiasm, when fortunately eleven o'clock struck.  D'Artagnan
Title:  and his companions remembered their audience, and as they would
Title:  very much have regretted that such an opportunity should be lost,
Title:  they succeeded in calming their friends, who contented themselves
Title:  with hurling some paving stones against the gates; but the gates
Title:  were too strong.  They soon tired of the sport.  Besides, those
Title:  who must be considered the leaders of the enterprise had quit the
Title:  group and were making their way toward the hotel of M. de
Title:  Treville, who was waiting for them, already informed of this
Title:  fresh disturbance.
Title:  
Title:  "Quick to the Louvre," said he, "to the Louvre without losing an
Title:  instant, and let us endeavor to see the king before he is
Title:  prejudiced by the cardinal.  We will describe the thing to him as
Title:  a consequence of the affair of yesterday, and the two will pass
Title:  off together."
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville, accompanied by the four young fellows, directed
Title:  his course toward the Louvre; but to the great astonishment of
Title:  the captain of the Musketeers, he was informed that the king had
Title:  gone stag hunting in the forest of St. Germain.  M. de Treville
Title:  required this intelligence to be repeated to him twice, and each
Title:  time his companions saw his brow become darker.
Title:  
Title:  "Had his Majesty," asked he, "any intention of holding this
Title:  hunting party yesterday?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, your Excellency," replied the valet de chambre, "the Master
Title:  of the Hounds came this morning to inform him that he had marked
Title:  down a stag.  At first the king answered that he would not go;
Title:  but he could not resist his love of sport, and set out after
Title:  dinner."
Title:  
Title:  "And the king has seen the cardinal?" asked M. de Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "In all probability he has," replied the valet, "for I saw the
Title:  horses harnessed to his Eminence's carriage this morning, and
Title:  when I asked where he was going, they told me, 'To St. Germain.'"
Title:  
Title:  "He is beforehand with us," said M. de Treville.  "Gentlemen, I
Title:  will see the king this evening; but as to you, I do not advise
Title:  you to risk doing so."
Title:  
Title:  This advice was too reasonable, and moreover came from a man who
Title:  knew the king too well, to allow the four young men to dispute
Title:  it.  M. de Treville recommended everyone to return home and wait
Title:  for news.
Title:  
Title:  On entering his hotel, M. de Treville thought it best to be first
Title:  in making the complaint.  He sent one of his servants to M. de la
Title:  Tremouille with a letter in which he begged of him to eject the
Title:  cardinal's Guardsmen from his house, and to reprimand his people
Title:  for their audacity in making SORTIE against the king's
Title:  Musketeers.  But M. de la Tremouille--already prejudiced by his
Title:  esquire, whose relative, as we already know, Bernajoux was--
Title:  replied that it was neither for M. de Treville nor the Musketeers
Title:  to complain, but, on the contrary, for him, whose people the
Title:  Musketeers had assaulted and whose hotel they had endeavored to
Title:  burn.  Now, as the debate between these two nobles might last a
Title:  long time, each becoming, naturally, more firm in his own
Title:  opinion, M. de Treville thought of an expedient which might
Title:  terminate it quietly.  This was to go himself to M. de la
Title:  Tremouille.
Title:  
Title:  He repaired, therefore, immediately to his hotel, and caused
Title:  himself to be announced.
Title:  
Title:  The two nobles saluted each other politely, for if no friendship
Title:  existed between them, there was at least esteem.  Both were men
Title:  of courage and honor; and as M. de la Tremouille--a Protestant,
Title:  and seeing the king seldom--was of no party, he did not, in
Title:  general, carry any bias into his social relations.  This time,
Title:  however, his address, although polite, was cooler than usual.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said M. de Treville, "we fancy that we have each
Title:  cause to complain of the other, and I am come to endeavor to
Title:  clear up this affair."
Title:  
Title:  "I have no objection," replied M. de la Tremouille, "but I warn
Title:  you that I am well informed, and all the fault is with your
Title:  Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  "You are too just and reasonable a man, monsieur!" said Treville,
Title:  "not to accept the proposal I am about to make to you."
Title:  
Title:  "Make it, monsieur, I listen."
Title:  
Title:  "How is Monsieur Bernajoux, your esquire's relative?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, monsieur, very ill indeed!  In addition to the sword thrust
Title:  in his arm, which is not dangerous, he has received another right
Title:  through his lungs, of which the doctor says bad things."
Title:  
Title:  "But has the wounded man retained his senses?"
Title:  
Title:  "Perfectly."
Title:  
Title:  "Does he talk?"
Title:  
Title:  "With difficulty, but he can speak."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monsieur, let us go to him.  Let us adjure him, in the
Title:  name of the God before whom he must perhaps appear, to speak the
Title:  truth.  I will take him for judge in his own cause, monsieur, and
Title:  will believe what he will say."
Title:  
Title:  M. de la Tremouille reflected for an instant; then as it was
Title:  difficult to suggest a more reasonable proposal, he agreed to it.
Title:  
Title:  Both descended to the chamber in which the wounded man lay.  The
Title:  latter, on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him,
Title:  endeavored to raise himself up in his bed; but he was too weak,
Title:  and exhausted by the effort, he fell back again almost senseless.
Title:  
Title:  M. de la Tremouille approached him, and made him inhale some
Title:  salts, which recalled him to life.  Then M. de Treville,
Title:  unwilling that it should be thought that he had influenced the
Title:  wounded man, requested M. de la Tremouille to interrogate him
Title:  himself.
Title:  
Title:  That happened which M. de Treville had foreseen.  Placed between
Title:  life and death, as Bernajoux was, he had no idea for a moment of
Title:  concealing the truth; and he described to the two nobles the
Title:  affair exactly as it had passed.
Title:  
Title:  This was all that M. de Treville wanted.  He wished Bernajoux a
Title:  speedy convalescence, took leave of M. de la Tremouille, returned
Title:  to his hotel, and immediately sent word to the four friends that
Title:  he awaited their company at dinner.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville entertained good company, wholly anticardinalist,
Title:  though.  It may easily be understood, therefore, that the
Title:  conversation during the whole of dinner turned upon the two
Title:  checks that his Eminence's Guardsmen had received.  Now, as
Title:  d'Artagnan had been the hero of these two fights, it was upon him
Title:  that all the felicitations fell, which Athos, Porthos, and Aramis
Title:  abandoned to him, not only as good comrades, but as men who had
Title:  so often had their turn that could very well afford him his.
Title:  
Title:  Toward six o'clock M. de Treville announced that it was time to
Title:  go to the Louvre; but as the hour of audience granted by his
Title:  Majesty was past, instead of claiming the ENTREE by the back
Title:  stairs, he placed himself with the four young men in the
Title:  antechamber.  The king had not yet returned from hunting.  Our
Title:  young men had been waiting about half an hour, amid a crowd of
Title:  courtiers, when all the doors were thrown open, and his Majesty
Title:  was announced.
Title:  
Title:  At his announcement d'Artagnan felt himself tremble to the very
Title:  marrow of his bones.  The coming instant would in all probability
Title:  decide the rest of his life.  His eyes therefore were fixed in a
Title:  sort of agony upon the door through which the king must enter.
Title:  
Title:  Louis XIII appeared, walking fast.  He was in hunting costume
Title:  covered with dust, wearing large boots, and holding a whip in his
Title:  hand.  At the first glance, d'Artagnan judged that the mind of
Title:  the king was stormy.
Title:  
Title:  This disposition, visible as it was in his Majesty, did not
Title:  prevent the courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway.
Title:  In royal antechambers it is worth more to be viewed with an angry
Title:  eye than not to be seen at all.  The three Musketeers therefore
Title:  did not hesitate to make a step forward.  D'Artagnan on the
Title:  contrary remained concealed behind them; but although the king
Title:  knew Athos, Porthos, and Aramis personally, he passed before them
Title:  without speaking or looking--indeed, as if he had never seen them
Title:  before.  As for M. de Treville, when the eyes of the king fell
Title:  upon him, he sustained the look with so much firmness that it was
Title:  the king who dropped his eyes; after which his Majesty,
Title:  grumbling, entered his apartment.
Title:  
Title:  "Matters go but badly," said Athos, smiling; "and we shall not be
Title:  made Chevaliers of the Order this time."
Title:  
Title:  "Wait here ten minutes," said M. de Treville; "and if at the
Title:  expiration of ten minutes you do not see me come out, return to
Title:  my hotel, for it will be useless for you to wait for me longer."
Title:  
Title:  The four young men waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour,
Title:  twenty minutes; and seeing that M. de Treville did not return,
Title:  went away very uneasy as to what was going to happen.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville entered the king's cabinet boldly, and found his
Title:  Majesty in a very ill humor, seated on an armchair, beating his
Title:  boot with the handle of his whip.  This, however, did not prevent
Title:  his asking, with the greatest coolness, after his Majesty's
Title:  health.
Title:  
Title:  "Bad, monsieur, bad!" replied the king; "I am bored."
Title:  
Title:  This was, in fact, the worst complaint of Louis XIII, who would
Title:  sometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say,
Title:  "Monsieur So-and-so, let us weary ourselves together."
Title:  
Title:  "How!  Your Majesty is bored?  Have you not enjoyed the pleasures
Title:  of the chase today?"
Title:  
Title:  "A fine pleasure, indeed, monsieur!  Upon my soul, everything
Title:  degenerates; and I don't know whether it is the game which leaves
Title:  no scent, or the dogs that have no noses.  We started a stag of
Title:  ten branches.  We chased him for six hours, and when he was near
Title:  being taken--when St.-Simon was already putting his horn to his
Title:  mouth to sound the mort--crack, all the pack takes the wrong
Title:  scent and sets off after a two-year-older.  I shall be obliged to
Title:  give up hunting, as I have given up hawking.  Ah, I am an
Title:  unfortunate king, Monsieur de Treville!  I had but one gerfalcon,
Title:  and he died day before yesterday."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed, sire, I wholly comprehend your disappointment.  The
Title:  misfortune is great; but I think you have still a good number of
Title:  falcons, sparrow hawks, and tiercets."
Title:  
Title:  "And not a man to instruct them.  Falconers are declining.  I
Title:  know no one but myself who is acquainted with the noble art of
Title:  venery.  After me it will all be over, and people will hunt with
Title:  gins, snares, and traps.  If I had but the time to train pupils!
Title:  But there is the cardinal always at hand, who does not leave me a
Title:  moment's repose; who talks to me about Spain, who talks to me
Title:  about Austria, who talks to me about England!  Ah!  A PROPOS of
Title:  the cardinal, Monsieur de Treville, I am vexed with you!"
Title:  
Title:  This was the chance at which M. de Treville waited for the king.
Title:  He knew the king of old, and he knew that all these complaints
Title:  were but a preface--a sort of excitation to encourage himself--
Title:  and that he had now come to his point at last.
Title:  
Title:  "And in what have I been so unfortunate as to displease your
Title:  Majesty?" asked M. de Treville, feigning the most profound
Title:  astonishment.
Title:  
Title:  "Is it thus you perform your charge, monsieur?" continued the
Title:  king, without directly replying to de Treville's question.  "Is
Title:  it for this I name you captain of my Musketeers, that they should
Title:  assassinate a man, disturb a whole quarter, and endeavor to set
Title:  fire to Paris, without your saying a word?  But yet," continued
Title:  the king, "undoubtedly my haste accuses you wrongfully; without
Title:  doubt the rioters are in prison, and you come to tell me justice
Title:  is done."
Title:  
Title:  "Sire," replied M. de Treville, calmly, "on the contrary, I come
Title:  to demand it of you."
Title:  
Title:  "And against whom?" cried the king.
Title:  
Title:  "Against calumniators," said M. de Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  This is something new," replied the king.  "Will you tell
Title:  me that your three damned Musketeers, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis,
Title:  and your youngster from Bearn, have not fallen, like so many
Title:  furies, upon poor Bernajoux, and have not maltreated him in such
Title:  a fashion that probably by this time he is dead?  Will you tell
Title:  me that they did not lay siege to the hotel of the Duc de la
Title:  Tremouille, and that they did not endeavor to burn it?--which
Title:  would not, perhaps, have been a great misfortune in time of war,
Title:  seeing that it is nothing but a nest of Huguenots, but which is,
Title:  in time of peace, a frightful example.  Tell me, now, can you
Title:  deny all this?"
Title:  
Title:  "And who told you this fine story, sire?" asked Treville,
Title:  quietly.
Title:  
Title:  "Who has told me this fine story, monsieur?  Who should it be but
Title:  he who watches while I sleep, who labors while I amuse myself,
Title:  who conducts everything at home and abroad--in France as in
Title:  Europe?"
Title:  
Title:  "Your Majesty probably refers to God," said M. de Treville; "for
Title:  I know no one except God who can be so far above your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur; I speak of the prop of the state, of my only
Title:  servant, of my only friend--of the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "His Eminence is not his holiness, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean by that, monsieur?"
Title:  
Title:  "That it is only the Pope who is infallible, and that this
Title:  infallibility does not extend to cardinals."
Title:  
Title:  "You mean to say that he deceives me; you mean to say that he
Title:  betrays me?  You accuse him, then?  Come, speak; avow freely that
Title:  you accuse him!"
Title:  
Title:  "No, sire, but I say that he deceives himself.  I say that he is
Title:  ill-informed.  I say that he has hastily accused your Majesty's
Title:  Musketeers, toward whom he is unjust, and that he has not
Title:  obtained his information from good sources."
Title:  
Title:  "The accusation comes from Monsieur de la Tremouille, from the
Title:  duke himself.  What do you say to that?"
Title:  
Title:  "I might answer, sire, that he is too deeply interested in the
Title:  question to be a very impartial witness; but so far from that,
Title:  sire, I know the duke to be a royal gentleman, and I refer the
Title:  matter to him--but upon one condition, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is that your Majesty will make him come here, will
Title:  interrogate him yourself, TETE-A-TETE, without witnesses, and
Title:  that I shall see your Majesty as soon as you have seen the duke."
Title:  
Title:  "What, then!  You will bind yourself," cried the king, "by what
Title:  Monsieur de la Tremouille shall say?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "You will accept his judgment?"
Title:  
Title:  "Undoubtedly."
Title:  
Title:  "Any you will submit to the reparation he may require?"
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly."
Title:  
Title:  "La Chesnaye," said the king.  "La Chesnaye!"
Title:  
Title:  Louis XIII's confidential valet, who never left the door, entered
Title:  in reply to the call.
Title:  
Title:  "La Chesnaye," said the king, "let someone go instantly and find
Title:  Monsieur de la Tremouille; I wish to speak with him this
Title:  evening."
Title:  
Title:  "Your Majesty gives me your word that you will not see anyone
Title:  between Monsieur de la Tremouille and myself?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nobody, by the faith of a gentleman."
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow, then, sire?"
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "At what o'clock, please your Majesty?"
Title:  
Title:  "At any hour you will."
Title:  
Title:  "But in coming too early I should be afraid of awakening your
Title:  Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "Awaken me!  Do you think I ever sleep, then?  I sleep no longer,
Title:  monsieur.  I sometimes dream, that's all.  Come, then, as early
Title:  as you like--at seven o'clock; but beware, if you and your
Title:  Musketeers are guilty."
Title:  
Title:  "If my Musketeers are guilty, sire, the guilty shall be placed in
Title:  your Majesty's hands, who will dispose of them at your good
Title:  pleasure.  Does your Majesty require anything further?  Speak, I
Title:  am ready to obey."
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur, no; I am not called Louis the Just without reason.
Title:  Tomorrow, then, monsieur--tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  "Till then, God preserve your Majesty!"
Title:  
Title:  However ill the king might sleep, M. de Treville slept still
Title:  worse.  He had ordered his three Musketeers and their companion
Title:  to be with him at half past six in the morning.  He took them
Title:  with him, without encouraging them or promising them anything,
Title:  and without concealing from them that their luck, and even his
Title:  own, depended upon the cast of the dice.
Title:  
Title:  Arrived at the foot of the back stairs, he desired them to wait.
Title:  If the king was still irritated against them, they would depart
Title:  without being seen; if the king consented to see them, they would
Title:  only have to be called.
Title:  
Title:  On arriving at the king's private antechamber, M. de Treville
Title:  found La Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not been able
Title:  to find M. de la Tremouille on the preceding evening at his
Title:  hotel, that he returned too late to present himself at the
Title:  Louvre, that he had only that moment arrived and that he was at
Title:  that very hour with the king.
Title:  
Title:  This circumstance pleased M. de Treville much, as he thus became
Title:  certain that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself between
Title:  M. de la Tremouille's testimony and himself.
Title:  
Title:  In fact, ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door of
Title:  the king's closet opened, and M. de Treville saw M. de la
Title:  Tremouille come out.  The duke came straight up to him, and said:
Title:  "Monsieur de Treville, his Majesty has just sent for me in order
Title:  to inquire respecting the circumstances which took place
Title:  yesterday at my hotel.  I have told him the truth; that is to
Title:  say, that the fault lay with my people, and that I was ready to
Title:  offer you my excuses.  Since I have the good fortune to meet you,
Title:  I beg you to receive them, and to hold me always as one of your
Title:  friends."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur the Duke," said M. de Treville, "I was so confident of
Title:  your loyalty that I required no other defender before his Majesty
Title:  than yourself.  I find that I have not been mistaken, and I thank
Title:  you that there is still one man in France of whom may be said,
Title:  without disappointment, what I have said of you."
Title:  
Title:  "That's well said," cried the king, who had heard all these
Title:  compliments through the open door; "only tell him, Treville,
Title:  since he wishes to be considered your friend, that I also wish to
Title:  be one of his, but he neglects me; that it is nearly three years
Title:  since I have seen him, and that I never do see him unless I send
Title:  for him.  Tell him all this for me, for these are things which a
Title:  king cannot say for himself."
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, sire, thanks," said the duke; "but your Majesty may be
Title:  assured that it is not those--I do not speak of Monsieur de
Title:  Treville--whom your Majesty sees at all hours of the day that are
Title:  most devoted to you."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  You have heard what I said?  So much the better, Duke, so
Title:  much the better," said the king, advancing toward the door.  "Ah!
Title:  It is you, Treville.  Where are your Musketeers?  I told you the
Title:  day before yesterday to bring them with you; why have you not
Title:  done so?"
Title:  
Title:  "They are below, sire, and with your permission La Chesnaye will
Title:  bid them come up."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, let them come up immediately.  It is nearly eight
Title:  o'clock, and at nine I expect a visit.  Go, Monsieur Duke, and
Title:  return often.  Come in, Treville."
Title:  
Title:  The Duke saluted and retired.  At the moment he opened the door,
Title:  the three Musketeers and d'Artagnan, conducted by La Chesnaye,
Title:  appeared at the top of the staircase.
Title:  
Title:  "Come in, my braves," said the king, "come in; I am going to
Title:  scold you."
Title:  
Title:  The Musketeers advanced, bowing, d'Artagnan following closely
Title:  behind them.
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil!" continued the king.  "Seven of his Eminence's
Title:  Guards placed HORS DE COMBAT by you four in two days!  That's too
Title:  many, gentlemen, too many!  If you go on so, his Eminence will be
Title:  forced to renew his company in three weeks, and I to put the
Title:  edicts in force in all their rigor.  One now and then I don't say
Title:  much about; but seven in two days, I repeat, it is too many, it
Title:  is far too many!"
Title:  
Title:  "Therefore, sire, your Majesty sees that they are come, quite
Title:  contrite and repentant, to offer you their excuses."
Title:  
Title:  "Quite contrite and repentant!  Hem!" said the king.  "I place no
Title:  confidence in their hypocritical faces.  In particular, there is
Title:  one yonder of a Gascon look.  Come hither, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, who understood that it was to him this compliment was
Title:  addressed, approached, assuming a most deprecating air.
Title:  
Title:  "Why you told me he was a young man?  This is a boy, Treville, a
Title:  mere boy!  Do you mean to say that it was he who bestowed that
Title:  severe thrust at Jussac?"
Title:  
Title:  "And those two equally fine thrusts at Bernajoux."
Title:  
Title:  "Truly!"
Title:  
Title:  "Without reckoning," said Athos, "that if he had not rescued me
Title:  from the hands of Cahusac, I should not now have the honor of
Title:  making my very humble reverence to your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "Why he is a very devil, this Bearnais!  VENTRE-SAINT-GRIS,
Title:  Monsieur de Treville, as the king my father would have said.  But
Title:  at this sort of work, many doublets must be slashed and many
Title:  swords broken.  Now, Gascons are always poor, are they not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sire, I can assert that they have hitherto discovered no gold
Title:  mines in their mountains; though the Lord owes them this miracle
Title:  in recompense for the manner in which they supported the
Title:  pretensions of the king your father."
Title:  
Title:  "Which is to say that the Gascons made a king of me, myself,
Title:  seeing that I am my father's son, is it not, Treville?  Well,
Title:  happily, I don't say nay to it.  La Chesnaye, go and see if by
Title:  rummaging all my pockets you can find forty pistoles; and if you
Title:  can find them, bring them to me.  And now let us see, young man,
Title:  with your hand upon your conscience, how did all this come to
Title:  pass?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan related the adventure of the preceding day in all its
Title:  details; how, not having been able to sleep for the joy he felt
Title:  in the expectation of seeing his Majesty, he had gone to his
Title:  three friends three hours before the hour of audience; how they
Title:  had gone together to the tennis court, and how, upon the fear he
Title:  had manifested lest he receive a ball in the face, he had been
Title:  jeered at by Bernajoux who had nearly paid for his jeer with his
Title:  life and M. de la Tremouille, who had nothing to do with the
Title:  matter, with the loss of his hotel.
Title:  
Title:  "This is all very well," murmured the king, "yes, this is just
Title:  the account the duke gave me of the affair.  Poor cardinal!
Title:  Seven men in two days, and those of his very best!  But that's
Title:  quite enough, gentlemen; please to understand, that's enough.
Title:  You have taken your revenge for the Rue Ferou, and even exceeded
Title:  it; you ought to be satisfied."
Title:  
Title:  "If your Majesty is so," said Treville, "we are."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes; I am," added the king, taking a handful of gold from La
Title:  Chesnaye, and putting it into the hand of d'Artagnan.  "Here,"
Title:  said he, "is a proof of my satisfaction."
Title:  
Title:  At this epoch, the ideas of pride which are in fashion in our
Title:  days did not prevail.  A gentleman received, from hand to hand,
Title:  money from the king, and was not the least in the world
Title:  humiliated.  D'Artagnan put his forty pistoles into his pocket
Title:  without any scruple--on the contrary, thanking his Majesty
Title:  greatly.
Title:  
Title:  "There," said the king, looking at a clock, "there, now, as it is
Title:  half past eight, you may retire; for as I told you, I expect
Title:  someone at nine.  Thanks for your devotedness, gentlemen.  I may
Title:  continue to rely upon it, may I not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, sire!" cried the four companions, with one voice, "we would
Title:  allow ourselves to be cut to pieces in your Majesty's service."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, well, but keep whole; that will be better, and you will be
Title:  more useful to me.  Treville," added the king, in a low voice, as
Title:  the others were retiring, "as you have no room in the Musketeers,
Title:  and as we have besides decided that a novitiate is necessary
Title:  before entering that corps, place this young man in the company
Title:  of the Guards of Monsieur Dessessart, your brother-in-law.  Ah,
Title:  PARDIEU, Treville!  I enjoy beforehand the face the cardinal will
Title:  make.  He will be furious; but I don't care.  I am doing what is
Title:  right."
Title:  
Title:  The king waved his hand to Treville, who left him and rejoined
Title:  the Musketeers, whom he found sharing the forty pistoles with
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal, as his Majesty had said, was really furious, so
Title:  furious that during eight days he absented himself from the
Title:  king's gaming table.  This did not prevent the king from being as
Title:  complacent to him as possible whenever he met him, or from asking
Title:  in the kindest tone, "Well, Monsieur Cardinal, how fares it with
Title:  that poor Jussac and that poor Bernajoux of yours?"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  7  THE INTERIOR OF "THE MUSKETEERS"
Title:  
Title:  When d'Artagnan was out of the Louvre, and consulted his friends
Title:  upon the use he had best make of his share of the forty pistoles,
Title:  Athos advised him to order a good repast at the Pomme-de-Pin,
Title:  Porthos to engage a lackey, and Aramis to provide himself with a
Title:  suitable mistress.
Title:  
Title:  The repast was carried into effect that very day, and the lackey
Title:  waited at table.  The repast had been ordered by Athos, and the
Title:  lackey furnished by Porthos.  He was a Picard, whom the glorious
Title:  Musketeer had picked up on the Bridge Tournelle, making rings and
Title:  plashing in the water.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflective
Title:  and contemplative organization, and he had brought him away
Title:  without any other recommendation.  The noble carriage of this
Title:  gentleman, for whom he believed himself to be engaged, had won
Title:  Planchet--that was the name of the Picard.  He felt a slight
Title:  disappointment, however, when he saw that this place was already
Title:  taken by a compeer named Mousqueton, and when Porthos signified
Title:  to him that the state of his household, though great, would not
Title:  support two servants, and that he must enter into the service of
Title:  d'Artagnan.  Nevertheless, when he waited at the dinner given by
Title:  his master, and saw him take out a handful of gold to pay for it,
Title:  he believed his fortune made, and returned thanks to heaven for
Title:  having thrown him into the service of such a Croesus.  He
Title:  preserved this opinion even after the feast, with the remnants of
Title:  which he repaired his own long abstinence; but when in the
Title:  evening he made his master's bed, the chimeras of Planchet faded
Title:  away.  The bed was the only one in the apartment, which consisted
Title:  of an antechamber and a bedroom.  Planchet slept in the
Title:  antechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of d'Artagnan, and
Title:  which d'Artagnan from that time made shift to do without.
Title:  
Title:  Athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in his
Title:  service in a thoroughly peculiar fashion, and who was named
Title:  Grimaud.  He was very taciturn, this worthy signor.  Be it
Title:  understood we are speaking of Athos.  During the five or six
Title:  years that he had lived in the strictest intimacy with his
Title:  companions, Porthos and Aramis, they could remember having often
Title:  seen him smile, but had never heard him laugh.  His words were
Title:  brief and expressive, conveying all that was meant, and no more;
Title:  no embellishments, no embroidery, no arabesques.  His
Title:  conversation a matter of fact, without a single romance.
Title:  
Title:  Although Athos was scarcely thirty years old, and was of great
Title:  personal beauty and intelligence of mind, no one knew whether he
Title:  had ever had a mistress.  He never spoke of women.  He certainly
Title:  did not prevent others from speaking of them before him, although
Title:  it was easy to perceive that this kind of conversation, in which
Title:  he only mingled by bitter words and misanthropic remarks, was
Title:  very disagreeable to him.  His reserve, his roughness, and his
Title:  silence made almost an old man of him.  He had, then, in order
Title:  not to disturb his habits, accustomed Grimaud to obey him upon a
Title:  simple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips.  He never
Title:  spoke to him, except under the most extraordinary occasions.
Title:  
Title:  Sometimes, Grimaud, who feared his master as he did fire, while
Title:  entertaining a strong attachment to his person and a great
Title:  veneration for his talents, believed he perfectly understood what
Title:  he wanted, flew to execute the order received, and did precisely
Title:  the contrary.  Athos then shrugged his shoulders, and, without
Title:  putting himself in a passion, thrashed Grimaud.  On these days he
Title:  spoke a little.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos, as we have seen, had a character exactly opposite to
Title:  that of Athos.  He not only talked much, but he talked loudly,
Title:  little caring, we must render him that justice, whether anybody
Title:  listened to him or not.  He talked for the pleasure of talking
Title:  and for the pleasure of hearing himself talk.  He spoke upon all
Title:  subjects except the sciences, alleging in this respect the
Title:  inveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his childhood.
Title:  He had not so noble an air as Athos, and the commencement of
Title:  their intimacy often rendered him unjust toward that gentleman,
Title:  whom he endeavored to eclipse by his splendid dress.  But with
Title:  his simple Musketeer's uniform and nothing but the manner in
Title:  which he threw back his head and advanced his foot, Athos
Title:  instantly took the place which was his due and consigned the
Title:  ostentatious Porthos to the second rank.  Porthos consoled
Title:  himself by filling the antechamber of M. de Treville and the
Title:  guardroom of the Louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes,
Title:  after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies,
Title:  from the lawyer's dame to the baroness, there was question of
Title:  nothing less with Porthos than a foreign princess, who was
Title:  enormously fond of him.
Title:  
Title:  An old proverb says, "Like master, like man."  Let us pass, then,
Title:  from the valet of Athos to the valet of Porthos, from Grimaud to
Title:  Mousqueton.
Title:  
Title:  Mousqueton was a Norman, whose pacific name of Boniface his
Title:  master had changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of
Title:  Mousqueton.  He had entered the service of Porthos upon condition
Title:  that he should only be clothed and lodged, though in a handsome
Title:  manner; but he claimed two hours a day to himself, consecrated to
Title:  an employment which would provide for his other wants.  Porthos
Title:  agreed to the bargain; the thing suited him wonderfully well.  He
Title:  had doublets cut out of his old clothes and cast-off cloaks for
Title:  Mousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent tailor, who made his
Title:  clothes look as good as new by turning them, and whose wife was
Title:  suspected of wishing to make Porthos descend from his
Title:  aristocratic habits, Mousqueton made a very good figure when
Title:  attending on his master.
Title:  
Title:  As for Aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explained
Title:  the character--a character which, like that of his lackey was
Title:  called Bazin.  Thanks to the hopes which his master entertained
Title:  of someday entering into orders, he was always clothed in black,
Title:  as became the servant of a churchman.  He was a Berrichon,
Title:  thirty-five or forty years old, mild, peaceable, sleek, employing
Title:  the leisure his master left him in the perusal of pious works,
Title:  providing rigorously for two a dinner of few dishes, but
Title:  excellent.  For the rest, he was dumb, blind, and deaf, and of
Title:  unimpeachable fidelity.
Title:  
Title:  And now that we are acquainted, superficially at least, with the
Title:  masters and the valets, let us pass on to the dwellings occupied
Title:  by each of them.
Title:  
Title:  Athos dwelt in the Rue Ferou, within two steps of the Luxembourg.
Title:  His apartment consisted of two small chambers, very nicely fitted
Title:  up, in a furnished house, the hostess of which, still young and
Title:  still really handsome, cast tender glances uselessly at him.
Title:  Some fragments of past splendor appeared here and there upon the
Title:  walls of this modest lodging; a sword, for example, richly
Title:  embossed, which belonged by its make to the times of Francis I,
Title:  the hilt of which alone, encrusted with precious stones, might be
Title:  worth two hundred pistoles, and which, nevertheless, in his
Title:  moments of greatest distress Athos had never pledged or offered
Title:  for sale.  It had long been an object of ambition for Porthos.
Title:  Porthos would have given ten years of his life to possess this
Title:  sword.
Title:  
Title:  One day, when he had an appointment with a duchess, he endeavored
Title:  even to borrow it of Athos.  Athos, without saying anything,
Title:  emptied his pockets, got together all his jewels, purses,
Title:  aiguillettes, and gold chains, and offered them all to Porthos;
Title:  but as to the sword, he said it was sealed to its place and
Title:  should never quit it until its master should himself quit his
Title:  lodgings.  In addition to the sword, there was a portrait
Title:  representing a nobleman of the time of Henry III, dressed with
Title:  the greatest elegance, and who wore the Order of the Holy Ghost;
Title:  and this portrait had certain resemblances of lines with Athos,
Title:  certain family likenesses which indicated that this great noble,
Title:  a knight of the Order of the King, was his ancestor.
Title:  
Title:  Besides these, a casket of magnificent goldwork, with the same
Title:  arms as the sword and the portrait, formed a middle ornament to
Title:  the mantelpiece, and assorted badly with the rest of the
Title:  furniture.  Athos always carried the key of this coffer about
Title:  him; but he one day opened it before Porthos, and Porthos was
Title:  convinced that this coffer contained nothing but letters and
Title:  papers--love letters and family papers, no doubt.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos lived in an apartment, large in size and of very
Title:  sumptuous appearance, in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier.  Every time
Title:  he passed with a friend before his windows, at one of which
Title:  Mousqueton was sure to be placed in full livery, Porthos raised
Title:  his head and his hand, and said, "That is my abode!"  But he was
Title:  never to be found at home; he never invited anybody to go up with
Title:  him, and no one could form an idea of what his sumptuous
Title:  apartment contained in the shape of real riches.
Title:  
Title:  As to Aramis, he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir,
Title:  an eating room, and a bedroom, which room, situated, as the
Title:  others were, on the ground floor, looked out upon a little fresh
Title:  green garden, shady and impenetrable to the eyes of his
Title:  neighbors.
Title:  
Title:  With regard to d'Artagnan, we know how he was lodged, and we have
Title:  already made acquaintance with his lackey, Master Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, who was by nature very curious--as people generally
Title:  are who possess the genius of intrigue--did all he could to make
Title:  out who Athos, Porthos, and Aramis really were (for under these
Title:  pseudonyms each of these young men concealed his family name)--
Title:  Athos in particular, who, a league away, savored of nobility.  He
Title:  addressed himself then to Porthos to gain information respecting
Title:  Athos and Aramis, and to Aramis in order to learn something of
Title:  Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  Unfortunately Porthos knew nothing of the life of his silent
Title:  companion but what revealed itself.  It was said Athos had met
Title:  with great crosses in love, and that a frightful treachery had
Title:  forever poisoned the life of this gallant man.  What could this
Title:  treachery be?  All the world was ignorant of it.
Title:  
Title:  As to Porthos, except his real name (as was the case with those
Title:  of his two comrades), his life was very easily known.  Vain and
Title:  indiscreet, it was as easy to see through him as through a
Title:  crystal.  The only thing to mislead the investigator would have
Title:  been belief in all the good things he said of himself.
Title:  
Title:  With respect to Aramis, though having the air of having nothing
Title:  secret about him, he was a young fellow made up of mysteries,
Title:  answering little to questions put to him about others, and having
Title:  learned from him the report which prevailed concerning the
Title:  success of the Musketeer with a princess, wished to gain a little
Title:  insight into the amorous adventures of his interlocutor.  "And
Title:  you, my dear companion," said he, "you speak of the baronesses,
Title:  countesses, and princesses of others?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU!  I spoke of them because Porthos talked of them
Title:  himself, because he had paraded all these fine things before me.
Title:  But be assured, my dear Monsieur d'Artagnan, that if I had
Title:  obtained them from any other source, or if they had been confided
Title:  to me, there exists no confessor more discreet than myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I don't doubt that," replied d'Artagnan; "but it seems to me
Title:  that you are tolerably familiar with coats of arms--a certain
Title:  embroidered handkerchief, for instance, to which I owe the honor
Title:  of your acquaintance?"
Title:  
Title:  This time Aramis was not angry, but assumed the most modest air
Title:  and replied in a friendly tone, "My dear friend, do not forget
Title:  that I wish to belong to the Church, and that I avoid all mundane
Title:  opportunities.  The handkerchief you saw had not been given to
Title:  me, but it had been forgotten and left at my house by one of my
Title:  friends.  I was obliged to pick it up in order not to compromise
Title:  him and the lady he loves.  As for myself, I neither have, nor
Title:  desire to have, a mistress, following in that respect the very
Title:  judicious example of Athos, who has none any more than I have."
Title:  
Title:  "But what the devil!  You are not a priest, you are a Musketeer!"
Title:  
Title:  "A Musketeer for a time, my friend, as the cardinal says, a
Title:  Musketeer against my will, but a churchman at heart, believe me.
Title:  Athos and Porthos dragged me into this to occupy me.  I had, at
Title:  the moment of being ordained, a little difficulty with--But that
Title:  would not interest you, and I am taking up your valuable time."
Title:  
Title:  "Not at all; it interests me very much," cried d'Artagnan; "and
Title:  at this moment I have absolutely nothing to do."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but I have my breviary to repeat," answered Aramis; "then
Title:  some verses to compose, which Madame d'Aiguillon begged of me.
Title:  Then I must go to the Rue St. Honore in order to purchase some
Title:  rouge for Madame de Chevreuse.  So you see, my dear friend, that
Title:  if you are not in a hurry, I am very much in a hurry."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis held out his hand in a cordial manner to his young
Title:  companion, and took leave of him.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding all the pains he took, d'Artagnan was unable to
Title:  learn any more concerning his three new-made friends.  He formed,
Title:  therefore, the resolution of believing for the present all that
Title:  was said of their past, hoping for more certain and extended
Title:  revelations in the future.  In the meanwhile, he looked upon
Title:  Athos as an Achilles, Porthos as an Ajax, and Aramis as a Joseph.
Title:  
Title:  As to the rest, the life of the four young friends was joyous
Title:  enough.  Athos played, and that as a rule unfortunately.
Title:  Nevertheless, he never borrowed a sou of his companions, although
Title:  his purse was ever at their service; and when he had played upon
Title:  honor, he always awakened his creditor by six o'clock the next
Title:  morning to pay the debt of the preceding evening.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos had his fits.  On the days when he won he was insolent
Title:  and ostentatious; if he lost, he disappeared completely for
Title:  several days, after which he reappeared with a pale face and
Title:  thinner person, but with money in his purse.
Title:  
Title:  As to Aramis, he never played.  He was the worst Musketeer and
Title:  the most unconvivial companion imaginable.  He had always
Title:  something or other to do.  Sometimes in the midst of dinner, when
Title:  everyone, under the attraction of wine and in the warmth of
Title:  conversation, believed they had two or three hours longer to
Title:  enjoy themselves at table, Aramis looked at his watch, arose with
Title:  a bland smile, and took leave of the company, to go, as he said,
Title:  to consult a casuist with whom he had an appointment.  At other
Title:  times he would return home to write a treatise, and requested his
Title:  friends not to disturb him.
Title:  
Title:  At this Athos would smile, with his charming, melancholy smile,
Title:  which so became his noble countenance, and Porthos would drink,
Title:  swearing that Aramis would never be anything but a village CURE.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet, d'Artagnan's valet, supported his good fortune nobly.
Title:  He received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned to
Title:  his lodgings gay as a chaffinch, and affable toward his master.
Title:  When the wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping of
Title:  the Rue des Fossoyeurs--that is to say, when the forty pistoles
Title:  of King Louis XIII were consumed or nearly so--he commenced
Title:  complaints which Athos thought nauseous, Porthos indecent, and
Title:  Aramis ridiculous.  Athos counseled d'Artagnan to dismiss the
Title:  fellow; Porthos was of opinion that he should give him a good
Title:  thrashing first; and Aramis contended that a master should never
Title:  attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.
Title:  
Title:  "This is all very easy for you to say," replied d'Artagnan, "for
Title:  you, Athos, who live like a dumb man with Grimaud, who forbid him
Title:  to speak, and consequently never exchange ill words with him; for
Title:  you, Porthos, who carry matters in such a magnificent style, and
Title:  are a god to your valet, Mousqueton; and for you, Aramis, who,
Title:  always abstracted by your theological studies, inspire your
Title:  servant, Bazin, a mild, religious man, with a profound respect;
Title:  but for me, who am without any settled means and without
Title:  resources--for me, who am neither a Musketeer nor even a
Title:  Guardsman, what I am to do to inspire either the affection, the
Title:  terror, or the respect in Planchet?"
Title:  
Title:  "This is serious," answered the three friends; "it is a family
Title:  affair.  It is with valets as with wives, they must be placed at
Title:  once upon the footing in which you wish them to remain.  Reflect
Title:  upon it."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan did reflect, and resolved to thrash Planchet
Title:  provisionally; which he did with the conscientiousness that
Title:  d'Artagnan carried into everything.  After having well beaten
Title:  him, he forbade him to leave his service without his permission.
Title:  "For," added he, "the future cannot fail to mend; I inevitably
Title:  look for better times.  Your fortune is therefore made if you
Title:  remain with me, and I am too good a master to allow you to miss
Title:  such a chance by granting you the dismissal you require."
Title:  
Title:  This manner of acting roused much respect for d'Artagnan's policy
Title:  among the Musketeers.  Planchet was equally seized with
Title:  admiration, and said no more about going away.
Title:  
Title:  The life of the four young men had become fraternal.  D'Artagnan,
Title:  who had no settled habits of his own, as he came from his
Title:  province into the midst of his world quite new to him, fell
Title:  easily into the habits of his friends.
Title:  
Title:  They rose about eight o'clock in the winter, about six in summer,
Title:  and went to take the countersign and see how things went on at M.
Title:  de Treville's.  D'Artagnan, although he was not a Musketeer,
Title:  performed the duty of one with remarkable punctuality.  He went
Title:  on guard because he always kept company with whoever of his
Title:  friends was on duty.  He was well known at the Hotel of the
Title:  Musketeers, where everyone considered him a good comrade.  M. de
Title:  Treville, who had appreciated him at the first glance and who
Title:  bore him a real affection, never ceased recommending him to the
Title:  king.
Title:  
Title:  On their side, the three Musketeers were much attached to their
Title:  young comrade.  The friendship which united these four men, and
Title:  the need they felt of seeing another three or four times a day,
Title:  whether for dueling, business, or pleasure, caused them to be
Title:  continually running after one another like shadows; and the
Title:  Inseparables were constantly to be met with seeking one another,
Title:  from the Luxembourg to the Place St. Sulpice, or from the Rue du
Title:  Vieux-Colombier to the Luxembourg.
Title:  
Title:  In the meanwhile the promises of M. de Treville went on
Title:  prosperously.  One fine morning the king commanded M. de
Title:  Chevalier Dessessart to admit d'Artagnan as a cadet in his
Title:  company of Guards.  D'Artagnan, with a sigh, donned his uniform,
Title:  which he would have exchanged for that of a Musketeer at the
Title:  expense of ten years of his existence.  But M. de Treville
Title:  promised this favor after a novitiate of two years--a novitiate
Title:  which might besides be abridged if an opportunity should present
Title:  itself for d'Artagnan to render the king any signal service, or
Title:  to distinguish himself by some brilliant action.  Upon this
Title:  promise d'Artagnan withdrew, and the next day he began service.
Title:  
Title:  Then it became the turn of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis to mount
Title:  guard with d'Artagnan when he was on duty.  The company of M. le
Title:  Chevalier Dessessart thus received four instead of one when it
Title:  admitted d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  8  CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII, like all
Title:  other things of this world, after having had a beginning had an
Title:  end, and after this end our four companions began to be somewhat
Title:  embarrassed.  At first, Athos supported the association for a
Title:  time with his own means.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearances
Title:  to which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wants
Title:  of all for a fortnight.  At last it became Aramis's turn, who
Title:  performed it with a good grace and who succeeded--as he said, by
Title:  selling some theological books--in procuring a few pistoles.
Title:  
Title:  Then, as they had been accustomed to do, they had recourse to M.
Title:  de Treville, who made some advances on their pay; but these
Title:  advances could not go far with three Musketeers who were already
Title:  much in arrears and a Guardsman who as yet had no pay at all.
Title:  
Title:  At length when they found they were likely to be really in want,
Title:  they got together, as a last effort, eight or ten pistoles, with
Title:  which Porthos went to the gaming table.  Unfortunately he was in
Title:  a bad vein; he lost all, together with twenty-five pistoles for
Title:  which he had given his word.
Title:  
Title:  Then the inconvenience became distress.  The hungry friends,
Title:  followed by their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guard
Title:  rooms, picking up among their friends abroad all the dinners they
Title:  could meet with; for according to the advice of Aramis, it was
Title:  prudent to sow repasts right and left in prosperity, in order to
Title:  reap a few in time of need.
Title:  
Title:  Athos was invited four times, and each time took his friends and
Title:  their lackeys with him.  Porthos had six occasions, and contrived
Title:  in the same manner that his friends should partake of them;
Title:  Aramis had eight of them.  He was a man, as must have been
Title:  already perceived, who made but little noise, and yet was much
Title:  sought after.
Title:  
Title:  As to d'Artagnan, who as yet knew nobody in the capital, he only
Title:  found one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his own
Title:  province, and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the Guards.
Title:  He took his army to the priest's, where they devoured as much
Title:  provision as would have lasted him for two months, and to the
Title:  cornet's, who performed wonders; but as Planchet said, "People do
Title:  not eat at once for all time, even when they eat a good deal."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan thus felt himself humiliated in having only procured
Title:  one meal and a half for his companions--as the breakfast at the
Title:  priest's could only be counted as half a repast--in return for
Title:  the feasts which Athos, Porthos, and Aramis had procured him.  He
Title:  fancied himself a burden to the society, forgetting in his
Title:  perfectly juvenile good faith that he had fed this society for a
Title:  month; and he set his mind actively to work.  He reflected that
Title:  this coalition of four young, brave, enterprising, and active men
Title:  ought to have some other object than swaggering walks, fencing
Title:  lessons, and practical jokes, more or less witty.
Title:  
Title:  In fact, four men such as they were--four men devoted to one
Title:  another, from their purses to their lives; four men always
Title:  supporting one another, never yielding, executing singly or
Title:  together the resolutions formed in common; four arms threatening
Title:  the four cardinal points, or turning toward a single point--must
Title:  inevitably, either subterraneously, in open day, by mining, in
Title:  the trench, by cunning, or by force, open themselves a way toward
Title:  the object they wished to attain, however well it might be
Title:  defended, or however distant it may seem.  The only thing that
Title:  astonished d'Artagnan was that his friends had never thought of
Title:  this.
Title:  
Title:  He was thinking by himself, and even seriously racking his brain
Title:  to find a direction for this single force four times multiplied,
Title:  with which he did not doubt, as with the lever for which
Title:  Archimedes sought, they should succeed in moving the world, when
Title:  someone tapped gently at his door.  D'Artagnan awakened Planchet
Title:  and ordered him to open it.
Title:  
Title:  From this phrase, "d'Artagnan awakened Planchet," the reader must
Title:  not suppose it was night, or that day was hardly come.  No, it
Title:  had just struck four.  Planchet, two hours before, had asked his
Title:  master for some dinner, and he had answered him with the proverb,
Title:  "He who sleeps, dines."  And Planchet dined by sleeping.
Title:  
Title:  A man was introduced of simple mien, who had the appearance of a
Title:  tradesman.  Planchet, by way of dessert, would have liked to hear
Title:  the conversation; but the citizen declared to d'Artagnan that
Title:  what he had to say being important and confidential, he desired
Title:  to be left alone with him.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan dismissed Planchet, and requested his visitor to be
Title:  seated.  There was a moment of silence, during which the two men
Title:  looked at each other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance,
Title:  after which d'Artagnan bowed, as a sign that he listened.
Title:  
Title:  "I have heard Monsieur d'Artagnan spoken of as a very brave young
Title:  man," said the citizen; "and this reputation which he justly
Title:  enjoys had decided me to confide a secret to him."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak, monsieur, speak," said d'Artagnan, who instinctively
Title:  scented something advantageous.
Title:  
Title:  The citizen made a fresh pause and continued, "I have a wife who
Title:  is seamstress to the queen, monsieur, and who is not deficient in
Title:  either virtue or beauty.  I was induced to marry her about three
Title:  years ago, although she had but very little dowry, because
Title:  Monsieur Laporte, the queen's cloak bearer, is her godfather, and
Title:  befriends her."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monsieur?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Well!" resumed the citizen, "well, monsieur, my wife was
Title:  abducted yesterday morning, as she was coming out of her
Title:  workroom."
Title:  
Title:  "And by whom was your wife abducted?"
Title:  
Title:  "I know nothing surely, monsieur, but I suspect someone."
Title:  
Title:  "And who is the person whom you suspect?"
Title:  
Title:  "A man who has pursued her a long time."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!"
Title:  
Title:  "But allow me to tell you, monsieur," continued the citizen,
Title:  "that I am convinced that there is less love than politics in all
Title:  this."
Title:  
Title:  "Less love than politics," replied d'Artagnan, with a reflective
Title:  air; "and what do you suspect?"
Title:  
Title:  "I do not know whether I ought to tell you what I suspect."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, I beg you to observe that I ask you absolutely
Title:  nothing.  It is you who have come to me.  It is you who have told
Title:  me that you had a secret to confide in me.  Act, then, as you
Title:  think proper; there is still time to withdraw."
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and I
Title:  will have confidence in you.  I believe, then, that it is not on
Title:  account of any intrigues of her own that my wife has been
Title:  arrested, but because of those of a lady much greater than
Title:  herself."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!  Can it be on account of the amours of Madame de
Title:  Bois-Tracy?" said d'Artagnan, wishing to have the air, in the
Title:  eyes of the citizen, of being posted as to court affairs.
Title:  
Title:  "Higher, monsieur, higher."
Title:  
Title:  "Of Madame d'Aiguillon?"
Title:  
Title:  "Still higher."
Title:  
Title:  "Of Madame de Chevreuse?"
Title:  
Title:  "Of the--" d'Artagnan checked himself.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so low
Title:  that he was scarcely audible.
Title:  
Title:  "And with whom?"
Title:  
Title:  "With whom can it be, if not the Duke of--"
Title:  
Title:  "The Duke of--"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," replied the citizen, giving a still fainter
Title:  intonation to his voice.
Title:  
Title:  "But how do you know all this?"
Title:  
Title:  "How do I know it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, how do you know it?  No half-confidence, or--you understand!"
Title:  
Title:  "I know it from my wife, monsieur--from my wife herself."
Title:  
Title:  "Who learns it from whom?"
Title:  
Title:  "From Monsieur Laporte.  Did I not tell you that she was the
Title:  goddaughter of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of the
Title:  queen?  Well, Monsieur Laporte placed her near her Majesty in
Title:  order that our poor queen might at least have someone in whom she
Title:  could place confidence, abandoned as she is by the king, watched
Title:  as she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she is by everybody."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!  It begins to develop itself," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur.  One of her
Title:  conditions was that she should come and see me twice a week; for,
Title:  as I had the honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly--my wife,
Title:  then, came and confided to me that the queen at that very moment
Title:  entertained great fears."
Title:  
Title:  "Truly!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes.  The cardinal, as it appears, pursues he and persecutes her
Title:  more than ever.  He cannot pardon her the history of the
Title:  Saraband.  You know the history of the Saraband?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU!  Know it!" replied d'Artagnan, who knew nothing about
Title:  it, but who wished to appear to know everything that was going
Title:  on.
Title:  
Title:  "So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  "And the queen believes--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what does the queen believe?"
Title:  
Title:  "She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckingham
Title:  in her name."
Title:  
Title:  "In the queen's name?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, to
Title:  draw him into some snare."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  But your wife, monsieur, what has she to do with all
Title:  this?"
Title:  
Title:  "Her devotion to the queen is known; and they wish either to
Title:  remove her from her mistress, or to intimidate her, in order to
Title:  obtain her Majesty's secrets, or to seduce her and make use of
Title:  her as a spy."
Title:  
Title:  "That is likely," said d'Artagnan; "but the man who has abducted
Title:  her--do you know him?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have told you that I believe I know him."
Title:  
Title:  "His name?"
Title:  
Title:  "I do not know that; what I do know is that he is a creature of
Title:  the cardinal, his evil genius."
Title:  
Title:  "But you have seen him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, my wife pointed him out to me one day."
Title:  
Title:  'Has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognize
Title:  him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, certainly; he is a noble of very lofty carriage, black hair,
Title:  swarthy complexion, piercing eye, white teeth, and has a scar on
Title:  his temple."
Title:  
Title:  "A scar on his temple!" cried d'Artagnan; "and with that, white
Title:  teeth, a piercing eye, dark complexion, black hair, and haughty
Title:  carriage--why, that's my man of Meung."
Title:  
Title:  "He is your man, do you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes; but that has nothing to do with it.  No, I am wrong.
Title:  On the contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly.  If your man
Title:  is mine, with one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that's all;
Title:  but where to find this man?"
Title:  
Title:  "I know not."
Title:  
Title:  "Have you no information as to his abiding place?"
Title:  
Title:  "None.  One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre,
Title:  he was coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  The devil!" murmured d'Artagnan; "all this is vague
Title:  enough.  From whom have you learned of the abduction of your
Title:  wife?"
Title:  
Title:  "From Monsieur Laporte."
Title:  
Title:  "Did he give you any details?"
Title:  
Title:  "He knew none himself."
Title:  
Title:  "And you have learned nothing from any other quarter?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I have received--"
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "I fear I am committing a great imprudence."
Title:  
Title:  "You always come back to that; but I must make you see this time
Title:  that it is too late to retreat."
Title:  
Title:  "I do not retreat, MORDIEU!" cried the citizen, swearing in order
Title:  to rouse his courage.  "Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux--"
Title:  
Title:  "You call yourself Bonacieux?" interrupted d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that is my name."
Title:  
Title:  "You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux.  Pardon me for
Title:  interrupting you, but it appears to me that that name is familiar
Title:  to me."
Title:  
Title:  "Possibly, monsieur. I am your landlord."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said d'Artagnan, half rising and bowing; "you are my
Title:  landlord?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur, yes.  And as it is three months since you have
Title:  been here, and though, distracted as you must be in your
Title:  important occupations, you have forgotten to pay me my rent--as,
Title:  I say, I have not tormented you a single instant, I thought you
Title:  would appreciate my delicacy."
Title:  
Title:  "How can it be otherwise, my dear Bonacieux?" replied d'Artagnan;
Title:  "trust me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, and
Title:  if, as I told you, I can be of any service to you--"
Title:  
Title:  "I believe you, monsieur, I believe you; and as I was about to
Title:  say, by the word of Bonacieux, I have confidence in you."
Title:  
Title:  "Finish, then, what you were about to say."
Title:  
Title:  The citizen took a paper from his pocket, and presented it to
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "A letter?" said the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Which I received this morning."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he
Title:  approached the window to read it.  The citizen followed him.
Title:  
Title:  "'Do not seek your wife,'" read d'Artagnan; "'she will be
Title:  restored to you when there is no longer occasion for her. If you
Title:  make a single step to find her you are lost.'
Title:  
Title:  "That's pretty positive," continued d'Artagnan; "but after all,
Title:  it is but a menace."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but that menace terrifies me.  I am not a fighting man at
Title:  all, monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille."
Title:  
Title:  "Hum!" said d'Artagnan.  "I have no greater regard for the
Title:  Bastille than you.  If it were nothing but a sword thrust, why
Title:  then--"
Title:  
Title:  "I have counted upon you on this occasion, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes?"
Title:  
Title:  "Seeing you constantly surrounded by Musketeers of a very superb
Title:  appearance, and knowing that these Musketeers belong to Monsieur
Title:  de Treville, and were consequently enemies of the cardinal, I
Title:  thought that you and your friends, while rendering justice to
Title:  your poor queen, would be pleased to play his Eminence an ill
Title:  turn."
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt."
Title:  
Title:  "And then I have thought that considering three months' lodging,
Title:  about which I have said nothing--"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and I find it
Title:  excellent."
Title:  
Title:  "Reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor to
Title:  remain in my house I shall never speak to you about rent--"
Title:  
Title:  "Very kind!"
Title:  
Title:  "And adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer you
Title:  fifty pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be short
Title:  at the present moment."
Title:  
Title:  "Admirable!  You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am comfortably off, monsieur, that's all; I have scraped
Title:  together some such thing as an income of two or three thousand
Title:  crown in the haberdashery business, but more particularly in
Title:  venturing some funds in the last voyage of the celebrated
Title:  navigator Jean Moquet; so that you understand, monsieur--But"
Title:  cried the citizen.
Title:  
Title:  "What!" demanded d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Whom do I see yonder?"
Title:  
Title:  "Where?"
Title:  
Title:  "In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that
Title:  door--a man wrapped in a cloak."
Title:  
Title:  "It is he!" cried d'Artagnan and the citizen at the same time,
Title:  each having recognized his man.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, this time," cried d'Artagnan, springing to his sword, "this
Title:  time he will not escape me!"
Title:  
Title:  Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of the
Title:  apartment.  On the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who were
Title:  coming to see him.  They separated, and d'Artagnan rushed between
Title:  them like a dart.
Title:  
Title:  "Pah!  Where are you going?" cried the two Musketeers in a breath.
Title:  
Title:  "The man of Meung!" replied d'Artagnan, and disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had more than once related to his friends his
Title:  adventure with the stranger, as well as the apparition of the
Title:  beautiful foreigner, to whom this man had confided some important
Title:  missive.
Title:  
Title:  The opinion of Athos was that d'Artagnan had lost his letter in
Title:  the skirmish.  A gentleman, in his opinion--and according to
Title:  d'Artagnan's portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman--
Title:  would be incapable of the baseness of stealing a letter.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by a
Title:  lady to a cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had been
Title:  disturbed by the presence of d'Artagnan and his yellow horse.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, it
Title:  was better not to fathom them.
Title:  
Title:  They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from
Title:  d'Artagnan, what affair was in hand, and as they thought that
Title:  overtaking his man, or losing sight of him, d'Artagnan would
Title:  return to his rooms, they kept on their way.
Title:  
Title:  When they entered d'Artagnan's chamber, it was empty; the
Title:  landlord, dreading the consequences of the encounter which was
Title:  doubtless about to take place between the young man and the
Title:  stranger, had, consistent with the character he had given
Title:  himself, judged it prudent to decamp.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  9  D'ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF
Title:  
Title:  As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a half
Title:  hour, d'Artagnan returned.  He had again missed his man, who had
Title:  disappeared as if by enchantment.  D'Artagnan had run, sword in
Title:  hand, through all the neighboring streets, but had found nobody
Title:  resembling the man he sought for.  Then he came back to the point
Title:  where, perhaps, he ought to have begun, and that was to knock at
Title:  the door against which the stranger had leaned; but this proved
Title:  useless--for though he knocked ten or twelve times in succession,
Title:  no one answered, and some of the neighbors, who put their noses
Title:  out of their windows or were brought to their doors by the noise,
Title:  had assured him that that house, all the openings of which were
Title:  tightly closed, had not been inhabited for six months.
Title:  
Title:  While d'Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at
Title:  doors, Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning home
Title:  d'Artagnan found the reunion complete.
Title:  
Title:  "Well!" cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeing
Title:  d'Artagnan enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his
Title:  countenance upset with anger.
Title:  
Title:  "Well!" cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, "this man must
Title:  be the devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom,
Title:  like a shade, like a specter."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you believe in apparitions?" asked Athos of Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "I never believe in anything I have not seen, and as I never have
Title:  seen apparitions, I don't believe in them."
Title:  
Title:  "The Bible," said Aramis, "make our belief in them a law; the
Title:  ghost of Samuel appeared to Saul, and it is an article of faith
Title:  that I should be very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon,
Title:  Porthos."
Title:  
Title:  "At all events, man or devil, body or shadow, illusion or
Title:  reality, this man is born for my damnation; for his flight has
Title:  caused us to miss a glorious affair, gentlemen--an affair by
Title:  which there were a hundred pistoles, and perhaps more, to be
Title:  gained."
Title:  
Title:  "How is that?" cried Porthos and Aramis in a breath.
Title:  
Title:  As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented
Title:  himself with interrogating d'Artagnan by a look.
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet," said d'Artagnan to his domestic, who just then
Title:  insinuated his head through the half-open door in order to catch
Title:  some fragments of the conversation, "go down to my landlord,
Title:  Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask him to send me half a dozen bottles
Title:  of Beaugency wine; I prefer that."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!  You have credit with your landlord, then?" asked
Title:  Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," replied d'Artagnan, "from this very day; and mind, if the
Title:  wine is bad, we will send him to find better."
Title:  
Title:  "We must use, and not abuse," said Aramis, sententiously.
Title:  
Title:  "I always said that d'Artagnan had the longest head of the four,"
Title:  said Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which d'Artagnan
Title:  replied with a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence.
Title:  
Title:  "But come, what is this about?" asked Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Aramis, "impart it to us, my dear friend, unless the
Title:  honor of any lady be hazarded by this confidence; in that case
Title:  you would do better to keep it to yourself."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied," replied d'Artagnan; "the honor of no one will
Title:  have cause to complain of what I have to tell."
Title:  
Title:  He then related to his friends, word for word, all that had
Title:  passed between him and his host, and how the man who had abducted
Title:  the wife of his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had had
Title:  the difference at the hostelry of the Jolly Miller.
Title:  
Title:  "Your affair is not bad," said Athos, after having tasted like a
Title:  connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought
Title:  the wine good; "and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from
Title:  this good man.  Then there only remains to ascertain whether
Title:  these fifty or sixty pistoles are worth the risk of four heads."
Title:  
Title:  "But observe," cried d'Artagnan, "that there is a woman in the
Title:  affair--a woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened,
Title:  tortured perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her
Title:  mistress."
Title:  
Title:  "Beware, d'Artagnan, beware," said Aramis.  "You grow a little
Title:  too warm, in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux.
Title:  Woman was created for our destruction, and it is from her we
Title:  inherit all our miseries."
Title:  
Title:  At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and he
Title:  bit his lips.
Title:  
Title:  "It is not Madame Bonacieux about whom I am anxious," cried
Title:  d'Artagnan, "but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom the
Title:  cardinal persecutes, and who sees the heads of all her friends
Title:  fall, one after the other."
Title:  
Title:  "Why does she love what we hate most in the world, the Spaniards
Title:  and the English?"
Title:  
Title:  "Spain is her country," replied d'Artagnan; "and it is very
Title:  natural that she should love the Spanish, who are the children of
Title:  the same soil as herself.  As to the second reproach, I have
Title:  heard it said that she does not love the English, but an
Title:  Englishman."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, and by my faith," said Athos, "it must be acknowledged
Title:  that this Englishman is worthy of being loved.  I never saw a man
Title:  with a nobler air than his."
Title:  
Title:  "Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can," said
Title:  Porthos.  "I was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered his
Title:  pearls; and, PARDIEU, I picked up two that I sold for ten
Title:  pistoles each.  Do you know him, Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seized
Title:  him in the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, the
Title:  queen's equerry, introduced me.  I was at school at the time, and
Title:  the adventure appeared to me to be cruel for the king."
Title:  
Title:  "Which would not prevent me," said d'Artagnan, "if I knew where
Title:  the Duke of Buckingham was, from taking him by the hand and
Title:  conducting him to the queen, were it only to enrage the cardinal,
Title:  and if we could find means to play him a sharp turn, I vow that I
Title:  would voluntarily risk my head in doing it."
Title:  
Title:  "And did the mercer*," rejoined Athos, "tell you, d'Artagnan,
Title:  that the queen thought that Buckingham had been brought over by a
Title:  forged letter?"
Title:  
Title:  *Haberdasher
Title:  
Title:  "She is afraid so."
Title:  
Title:  "Wait a minute, then," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "What for?" demanded Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances."
Title:  
Title:  "And now I am convinced," said d'Artagnan, "that this abduction
Title:  of the queen's woman is connected with the events of which we are
Title:  speaking, and perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris."
Title:  
Title:  "The Gascon is full of ideas," said Porthos, with admiration.
Title:  
Title:  "I like to hear him talk," said Athos; "his dialect amuses me."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," cried Aramis, "listen to this."
Title:  
Title:  "Listen to Aramis," said his three friends.
Title:  
Title:  "Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom I
Title:  sometimes consult about my studies."
Title:  
Title:  Athos smiled.
Title:  
Title:  "He resides in a quiet quarter," continued Aramis; "his tastes
Title:  and his profession require it.  Now, at the moment when I left
Title:  his house--"
Title:  
Title:  Here Aramis paused.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," cried his auditors; "at the moment you left his house?"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who,
Title:  in the full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped by
Title:  some unforeseen obstacle; but the eyes of his three companions
Title:  were fixed upon him, their ears were wide open, and there were no
Title:  means of retreat.
Title:  
Title:  "This doctor has a niece," continued Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, he has a niece!" interrupted Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "A very respectable lady," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  The three friends burst into laughter.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me," replied Aramis, "you shall
Title:  know nothing."
Title:  
Title:  "We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones,"
Title:  said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I will continue, then," resumed Aramis.  "This niece comes
Title:  sometimes to see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at
Title:  the same time that I was, and it was my duty to offer to conduct
Title:  her to her carriage."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?"
Title:  interrupted Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness of
Title:  tongue.  "A nice acquaintance, my friend!"
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos," replied Aramis, "I have had the occasion to observe to
Title:  you more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that is
Title:  injurious to you among the women."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen, gentlemen," cried d'Artagnan, who began to get a
Title:  glimpse of the result of the adventure, "the thing is serious.
Title:  Let us try not to jest, if we can.  Go on Aramis, go on."
Title:  
Title:  "All at once, a tall, dark gentleman--just like yours,
Title:  d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "The same, perhaps," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Possibly," continued Aramis, "came toward me, accompanied by
Title:  five or six men who followed about ten paces behind him; and in
Title:  the politest tone, 'Monsieur Duke,' said he to me, 'and you
Title:  madame,' continued he, addressing the lady on my arm--"
Title:  
Title:  "The doctor's niece?"
Title:  
Title:  "Hold your tongue, Porthos," said Athos; "you are insupportable."
Title:  
Title:  "'--will you enter this carriage, and that without offering the
Title:  least resistance, without making the least noise?'"
Title:  
Title:  "He took you for Buckingham!" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I believe so," replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "But the lady?" asked Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "He took her for the queen!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Just so," replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "The Gascon is the devil!" cried Athos; "nothing escapes him."
Title:  
Title:  "The fact is," said Porthos, "Aramis is of the same height, and
Title:  something of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appears
Title:  to me that the dress of a Musketeer--"
Title:  
Title:  "I wore an enormous cloak," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "In the month of July?  The devil!" said Porthos.  "Is the doctor
Title:  afraid that you may be recognized?"
Title:  
Title:  "I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the
Title:  person; but the face--"
Title:  
Title:  "I had a large hat," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, good lord," cried Porthos, "what precautions for the study
Title:  of theology!"
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "do not let us lose our
Title:  time in jesting.  Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer's
Title:  wife--that is the key of the intrigue."
Title:  
Title:  "A woman of such inferior condition!  Can you believe so?" said
Title:  Porthos, protruding his lips with contempt.
Title:  
Title:  "She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of the
Title:  queen.  Have I not told you so, gentlemen?  Besides, it has
Title:  perhaps been her Majesty's calculation to seek on this occasion
Title:  for support so lowly.  High heads expose themselves from afar,
Title:  and the cardinal is longsighted."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Porthos, "in the first place make a bargain with the
Title:  mercer, and a good bargain."
Title:  
Title:  "That's useless," said d'Artagnan; "for I believe if he does not
Title:  pay us, we shall be well enough paid by another party."
Title:  
Title:  At this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon the
Title:  stairs; the door was thrown violently open, and the unfortunate
Title:  mercer rushed into the chamber in which the council was held.
Title:  
Title:  "Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!" cried he.
Title:  "There are four men come to arrest me.  Save me!  Save me!"
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis arose.
Title:  
Title:  "A moment," cried d'Artagnan, making them a sign to replace in
Title:  the scabbard their half-drawn swords.  "It is not courage that is
Title:  needed; it is prudence."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet," cried Porthos, "we will not leave--"
Title:  
Title:  "You will leave d'Artagnan to act as he thinks proper," said
Title:  Athos.  "He has, I repeat, the longest head of the four, and for
Title:  my part I declare that I will obey him.  Do as you think best,
Title:  d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of the
Title:  antechamber, but seeing four Musketeers standing, and their
Title:  swords by their sides, they hesitated about going farther.
Title:  
Title:  "Come in, gentlemen, come in," called d'Artagnan; "you are here
Title:  in my apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king and
Title:  cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we
Title:  have received?" asked one who appeared to be the leader of the
Title:  party.
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it were
Title:  necessary."
Title:  
Title:  "What does he say?" grumbled Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "You are a simpleton," said Athos.  "Silence!"
Title:  
Title:  "But you promised me--" whispered the poor mercer.
Title:  
Title:  "We can only save you by being free ourselves," replied
Title:  d'Artagnan, in a rapid, low tone; "and if we appear inclined to
Title:  defend you, they will arrest us with you."
Title:  
Title:  "It seems, nevertheless--"
Title:  
Title:  "Come, gentlemen, come!" said d'Artagnan, aloud; "I have no
Title:  motive for defending Monsieur.  I saw him today for the first
Title:  time, and he can tell you on what occasion; he came to demand the
Title:  rent of my lodging.  Is that not true, Monsieur Bonacieux?
Title:  Answer!"
Title:  
Title:  "That is the very truth," cried the mercer; "but Monsieur does
Title:  not tell you--"
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my
Title:  friends; silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin
Title:  everybody without saving yourself!  Come, come, gentlemen, remove
Title:  the fellow."  And d'Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer
Title:  among the Guards, saying to him, "You are a shabby old fellow, my
Title:  dear.  You come to demand money of me--of a Musketeer!  To prison
Title:  with him!  Gentlemen, once more, take him to prison, and keep him
Title:  under key as long as possible; that will give me time to pay
Title:  him."
Title:  
Title:  The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey.  As
Title:  they were going down d'Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of
Title:  their leader.
Title:  
Title:  "May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?" said
Title:  d'Artagnan, filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which he
Title:  had obtained from the liberality of M. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "That will do me great honor," said the leader of the posse, "and
Title:  I accept thankfully."
Title:  
Title:  "Then to yours, monsieur--what is your name?"
Title:  
Title:  "Boisrenard."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Boisrenard."
Title:  
Title:  "To yours, my gentlemen!  What is your name, in your turn, if you
Title:  please?"
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "To yours, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "And above all others," cried d'Artagnan, as if carried away by
Title:  his enthusiasm, "to that of the king and the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity
Title:  of d'Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good,
Title:  and he was convinced.
Title:  
Title:  "What diabolical villainy you have performed here," said Porthos,
Title:  when the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends
Title:  found themselves alone.  "Shame, shame, for four Musketeers to
Title:  allow an unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in
Title:  their midst!  And a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!"
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos," said Aramis, "Athos has already told you that you are
Title:  a simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion.  D'Artagnan, you are
Title:  a great man; and when you occupy Monsieur de Treville's place, I
Title:  will come and ask your influence to secure me an abbey."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I am in a maze," said Porthos; "do YOU approve of what
Title:  d'Artagnan has done?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARBLEU!  Indeed I do," said Athos; "I not only approve of what
Title:  he has done, but I congratulate him upon it."
Title:  
Title:  "And now, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, without stopping to
Title:  explain his conduct to Porthos, "All for one, one for all--that
Title:  is our motto, is it not?"
Title:  
Title:  "And yet--" said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Hold out your hand and swear!" cried Athos and Aramis at once.
Title:  
Title:  Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthos
Title:  stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one
Title:  voice the formula dictated by d'Artagnan:
Title:  
Title:  "All for one, one for all."
Title:  
Title:  "That's well!  Now let us everyone retire to his own home," said
Title:  d'Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life;
Title:  "and attention!  For from this moment we are at feud with the
Title:  cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  10  A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
Title:  
Title:  The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; as
Title:  soon as societies, in forming, had invented any kind of police,
Title:  that police invented mousetraps.
Title:  
Title:  As perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the Rue
Title:  de Jerusalem, and as it is fifteen years since we applied this
Title:  word for the first time to this thing, allow us to explain to
Title:  them what is a mousetrap.
Title:  
Title:  When in a house, of whatever kind it may be, an individual
Title:  suspected of any crime is arrested, the arrest is held secret.
Title:  Four or five men are placed in ambuscade in the first room.  The
Title:  door is opened to all who knock.  It is closed after them, and
Title:  they are arrested; so that at the end of two or three days they
Title:  have in their power almost all the HABITUES of the establishment.
Title:  And that is a mousetrap.
Title:  
Title:  The apartment of M. Bonacieux, then, became a mousetrap; and
Title:  whoever appeared there was taken and interrogated by the
Title:  cardinal's people.  It must be observed that as a separate
Title:  passage led to the first floor, in which d'Artagnan lodged, those
Title:  who called on him were exempted from this detention.
Title:  
Title:  Besides, nobody came thither but the three Musketeers; they had
Title:  all been engaged in earnest search and inquiries, but had
Title:  discovered nothing.  Athos had even gone so far as to question M.
Title:  de Treville--a thing which, considering the habitual reticence of
Title:  the worthy Musketeer, had very much astonished his captain.  But
Title:  M. de Treville knew nothing, except that the last time he had
Title:  seen the cardinal, the king, and the queen, the cardinal looked
Title:  very thoughtful, the king uneasy, and the redness of the queen's
Title:  eyes donated that she had been sleepless or tearful.  But this
Title:  last circumstance was not striking, as the queen since her
Title:  marriage had slept badly and wept much.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville requested Athos, whatever might happen, to be
Title:  observant of his duty to the king, but particularly to the queen,
Title:  begging him to convey his desires to his comrades.
Title:  
Title:  As to d'Artagnan, he did not budge from his apartment.  He
Title:  converted his chamber into an observatory.  From his windows he
Title:  saw all the visitors who were caught.  Then, having removed a
Title:  plank from his floor, and nothing remaining but a simple ceiling
Title:  between him and the room beneath, in which the interrogatories
Title:  were made, he heard all that passed between the inquisitors and
Title:  the accused.
Title:  
Title:  The interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated upon
Title:  the persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: "Has Madame
Title:  Bonacieux sent anything to you for her husband, or any other
Title:  person?  Has Monsieur Bonacieux sent anything to you for his
Title:  wife, or for any other person?  Has either of them confided
Title:  anything to you by word of mouth?"
Title:  
Title:  "If they knew anything, they would not question people in this
Title:  manner," said d'Artagnan to himself.  "Now, what is it they want
Title:  to know?  Why, they want to know if the Duke of Buckingham is in
Title:  Paris, and if he has had, or is likely to have, an interview with
Title:  the queen."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan held onto this idea, which, from what he had heard,
Title:  was not wanting in probability.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, the mousetrap continued in operation, and
Title:  likewise d'Artagnan's vigilance.
Title:  
Title:  On the evening of the day after the arrest of poor Bonacieux, as
Title:  Athos had just left d'Artagnan to report at M. de Treville's, as
Title:  nine o'clock had just struck, and as Planchet, who had not yet
Title:  made the bed, was beginning his task, a knocking was heard at the
Title:  street door.  The door was instantly opened and shut; someone was
Title:  taken in the mousetrap.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan flew to his hole, laid himself down on the floor at
Title:  full length, and listened.
Title:  
Title:  Cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared to
Title:  be endeavoring to stifle.  There were no questions.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" said d'Artagnan to himself.  "It seems like a woman!
Title:  They search her; she resists; they use force--the scoundrels!"
Title:  
Title:  In spite of his prudence, d'Artagnan restrained himself with
Title:  great difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going
Title:  on below.
Title:  
Title:  "But I tell you that I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen!
Title:  I tell you I am Madame Bonacieux; I tell you I belong to the
Title:  queen!" cried the unfortunate woman.
Title:  
Title:  "Madame Bonacieux!" murmured d'Artagnan.  "Can I be so lucky as
Title:  to find what everybody is seeking for?"
Title:  
Title:  The voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movement
Title:  shook the partition.  The victim resisted as much as a woman
Title:  could resist four men.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon, gentlemen--par--" murmured the voice, which could now
Title:  only be heard in inarticulate sounds.
Title:  
Title:  "They are binding her; they are going to drag her away," cried
Title:  d'Artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor.  "My sword!
Title:  Good, it is by my side!  Planchet!"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Run and seek Athos, Porthos and Aramis.  One of the three will
Title:  certainly be at home, perhaps all three.  Tell them to take arms,
Title:  to come here, and to run!  Ah, I remember, Athos is at Monsieur
Title:  de Treville's."
Title:  
Title:  "But where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner,"
Title:  cried d'Artagnan.  "You put back the boards, sweep the floor, go
Title:  out at the door, and run as I told you."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, monsieur!  Monsieur!  You will kill yourself," cried
Title:  Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  "Hold your tongue, stupid fellow," said d'Artagnan; and laying
Title:  hold of the casement, he let himself gently down from the first
Title:  story, which fortunately was not very elevated, without doing
Title:  himself the slightest injury.
Title:  
Title:  He then went straight to the door and knocked, murmuring, "I will
Title:  go myself and be caught in the mousetrap, but woe be to the cats
Title:  that shall pounce upon such a mouse!"
Title:  
Title:  The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man
Title:  before the tumult ceased, steps approached, the door was opened,
Title:  and d'Artagnan, sword in hand, rushed into the rooms of M.
Title:  Bonacieux, the door of which doubtless acted upon by a spring,
Title:  closed after him.
Title:  
Title:  Then those who dwelt in Bonacieux's unfortunate house, together
Title:  with the nearest neighbors, heard loud cries, stamping of feet,
Title:  clashing of swords, and breaking of furniture.  A moment after,
Title:  those who, surprised by this tumult, had gone to their windows to
Title:  learn the cause of it, saw the door open, and four men, clothed
Title:  in black, not COME out of it, but FLY, like so many frightened
Title:  crows, leaving on the ground and on the corners of the furniture,
Title:  feathers from their wings; that is to say, patches of their
Title:  clothes and fragments of their cloaks.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was conqueror--without much effort, it must be
Title:   confessed, for only one of the officers was armed, and even he
Title:  defended himself for form's sake.  It is true that the three
Title:  others had endeavored to knock the young man down with chairs,
Title:  stools, and crockery; but two or three scratches made by the
Title:  Gascon's blade terrified them.  Ten minutes sufficed for their
Title:  defeat, and d'Artagnan remained master of the field of battle.
Title:  
Title:  The neighbors who had opened their windows, with the coolness
Title:  peculiar to the inhabitants of Paris in these times of perpetual
Title:  riots and disturbances, closed them again as soon as they saw the
Title:  four men in black flee--their instinct telling them that for the
Title:  time all was over.  Besides, it began to grow late, and then, as
Title:  today, people went to bed early in the quarter of the Luxembourg.
Title:  
Title:  On being left alone with Mme. Bonacieux, d'Artagnan turned toward
Title:  her; the poor woman reclined where she had been left,
Title:  half-fainting upon an armchair.  D'Artagnan examined her with a
Title:  rapid glance.
Title:  
Title:  She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six years, with
Title:  dark hair, blue eyes, and a nose slightly turned up, admirable
Title:  teeth, and a complexion marbled with rose and opal.  There,
Title:  however, ended the signs which might have confounded her with a
Title:  lady of rank.  The hands were white, but without delicacy; the
Title:  feet did not bespeak the woman of quality.  Happily, d'Artagnan
Title:  was not yet acquainted with such niceties.
Title:  
Title:  While d'Artagnan was examining Mme. Bonacieux, and was, as we
Title:  have said, close to her, he saw on the ground a fine cambric
Title:  handkerchief, which he picked up, as was his habit, and at the
Title:  corner of which he recognized the same cipher he had seen on the
Title:  handkerchief which had nearly caused him and Aramis to cut each
Title:  other's throat.
Title:  
Title:  From that time, d'Artagnan had been cautious with respect to
Title:  handkerchiefs with arms on them, and he therefore placed in the
Title:  pocket of Mme. Bonacieux the one he had just picked up.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment Mme. Bonacieux recovered her senses.  She opened
Title:  her eyes, looked around her with terror, saw that the apartment
Title:  was empty and that she was alone with her liberator.  She
Title:  extended her hands to him with a smile.  Mme. Bonacieux had the
Title:  sweetest smile in the world.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur!" said she, "you have saved me; permit me to thank
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame," said d'Artagnan, "I have only done what every gentleman
Title:  would have done in my place; you owe me no thanks."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that you
Title:  have not served an ingrate.  But what could these men, whom I at
Title:  first took for robbers, want with me, and why is Monsieur
Title:  Bonacieux not here?"
Title:  
Title:  "Madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers could
Title:  have been, for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as to
Title:  your husband, Monsieur Bonacieux, he is not here because he was
Title:  yesterday evening conducted to the Bastille."
Title:  
Title:  "My husband in the Bastille!" cried Mme. Bonacieux.  "Oh, my God!
Title:  What has he done?  Poor dear man, he is innocence itself!"
Title:  
Title:  And something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrified
Title:  features of the young woman.
Title:  
Title:  "What has he done, madame?" said d'Artagnan.  "I believe that his
Title:  only crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and the
Title:  misfortune to be your husband."
Title:  
Title:  "But, monsieur, you know then--"
Title:  
Title:  "I know that you have been abducted, madame."
Title:  
Title:  "And by whom?  Do you know him?  Oh, if you know him, tell me!"
Title:  
Title:  "By a man of from forty to forty-five years, with black hair, a
Title:  dark complexion, and a scar on his left temple."
Title:  
Title:  "That is he, that is he; but his name?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, his name?  I do not know that."
Title:  
Title:  "And did my husband know I had been carried off?"
Title:  
Title:  "He was informed of it by a letter, written to him by the
Title:  abductor himself."
Title:  
Title:  "And does he suspect," said Mme. Bonacieux, with some
Title:  embarrassment, "the cause of this event?"
Title:  
Title:  "He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause."
Title:  
Title:  "I doubted from the first; and now I think entirely as he does.
Title:  Then my dear Monsieur Bonacieux has not suspected me a single
Title:  instant?"
Title:  
Title:  "So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and
Title:  above all, of your love."
Title:  
Title:  A second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips of
Title:  the pretty young woman.
Title:  
Title:  "But," continued d'Artagnan, "how did you escape?"
Title:  
Title:  "I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as I
Title:  had known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the help
Title:  of the sheets I let myself down from the window.  Then, as I
Title:  believed my husband would be at home, I hastened hither."
Title:  
Title:  "To place yourself under his protection?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no, poor dear man!  I knew very well that he was incapable
Title:  of defending me; but as he could serve us in other ways, I wished
Title:  to inform him."
Title:  
Title:  "Of what?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, that is not my secret; I must not, therefore, tell you."
Title:  
Title:  "Besides," said d'Artagnan, "pardon me, madame, if, guardsman as
Title:  I am, I remind you of prudence--besides, I believe we are not
Title:  here in a very proper place for imparting confidences.  The men I
Title:  have put to flight will return reinforced; if they find us here,
Title:  we are lost.  I have sent for three of my friends, but who knows
Title:  whether they were at home?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes!  You are right," cried the affrighted Mme. Bonacieux;
Title:  "let us fly!  Let us save ourselves."
Title:  
Title:  At these words she passed her arm under that of d'Artagnan, and
Title:  urged him forward eagerly.
Title:  
Title:  "But whither shall we fly--whither escape?"
Title:  
Title:  "Let us first withdraw from this house; afterward we shall see."
Title:  
Title:  The young woman and the young man, without taking the trouble to
Title:  shut the door after them, descended the Rue des Fossoyeurs
Title:  rapidly, turned into the Rue des Fosses-Monsieur-le-Prince, and
Title:  did not stop till they came to the Place St. Sulpice.
Title:  
Title:  "And now what are we to do, and where do you wish me to conduct
Title:  you?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I am at quite a loss how to answer you, I admit," said Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux.  "My intention was to inform Monsieur Laporte, through
Title:  my husband, in order that Monsieur Laporte might tell us
Title:  precisely what had taken place at the Louvre in the last three
Title:  days, and whether there is any danger in presenting myself
Title:  there."
Title:  
Title:  "But I," said d'Artagnan, "can go and inform Monsieur Laporte."
Title:  
Title:  "No doubt you could, only there is one misfortune, and that is
Title:  that Monsieur Bonacieux is known at the Louvre, and would be
Title:  allowed to pass; whereas you are not known there, and the gate
Title:  would be closed against you."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, bah!" said d'Artagnan; "you have at some wicket of the
Title:  Louvre a CONCIERGE who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to a
Title:  password, would--"
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "And if I give you this password," said she, "would you forget it
Title:  as soon as you used it?"
Title:  
Title:  "By my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!" said d'Artagnan, with
Title:  an accent so truthful that no one could mistake it.
Title:  
Title:  "Then I believe you.  You appear to be a brave young man;
Title:  besides, your fortune may perhaps be the result of your
Title:  devotedness."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "I will do, without a promise and voluntarily, all that I can do
Title:  to serve the king and be agreeable to the queen.  Dispose of me,
Title:  then, as a friend."
Title:  
Title:  "But I--where shall I go meanwhile?"
Title:  
Title:  "Is there nobody from whose house Monsieur Laporte can come and
Title:  fetch you?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, I can trust nobody."
Title:  
Title:  "Stop," said d'Artagnan; "we are near Athos's door.  Yes, here it
Title:  is."
Title:  
Title:  "Who is this Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "One of my friends."
Title:  
Title:  "But if he should be at home and see me?"
Title:  
Title:  "He is not at home, and I will carry away the key, after having
Title:  placed you in his apartment."
Title:  
Title:  "But if he should return?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, he won't return; and if he should, he will be told that I
Title:  have brought a woman with me, and that woman is in his
Title:  apartment."
Title:  
Title:  "But that will compromise me sadly, you know."
Title:  
Title:  "Of what consequence?  Nobody knows you.  Besides, we are in a
Title:  situation to overlook ceremony."
Title:  
Title:  "Come, then, let us go to your friend's house.  Where does he
Title:  live?"
Title:  
Title:  "Rue Ferou, two steps from here."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us go!"
Title:  
Title:  Both resumed their way.  As d'Artagnan had foreseen, Athos was
Title:  not within.  He took the key, which was customarily given him as
Title:  one of the family, ascended the stairs, and introduced Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux into the little apartment of which we have given a
Title:  description.
Title:  
Title:  "You are at home," said he.  "Remain here, fasten the door
Title:  inside, and open it to nobody unless you hear three taps like
Title:  this;" and he tapped thrice--two taps close together and pretty
Title:  hard, the other after an interval, and lighter.
Title:  
Title:  "That is well," said Mme. Bonacieux.  "Now, in my turn, let me
Title:  give you my instructions."
Title:  
Title:  "I am all attention."
Title:  
Title:  "Present yourself at the wicket of the Louvre, on the side of the
Title:  Rue de l'Echelle, and ask for Germain."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, and then?"
Title:  
Title:  "He will ask you what you want, and you will answer by these two
Title:  words, 'Tours' and 'Bruxelles.'  He will at once put himself at
Title:  your orders."
Title:  
Title:  "And what shall I command him?"
Title:  
Title:  "To go and fetch Monsieur Laporte, the queen's VALET DE CHAMBRE."
Title:  
Title:  "And when he shall have informed him, and Monsieur Laporte is
Title:  come?"
Title:  
Title:  "You will send him to me."
Title:  
Title:  "That is well; but where and how shall I see you again?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you wish to see me again?"
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, let that care be mine, and be at ease."
Title:  
Title:  "I depend upon your word."
Title:  
Title:  "You may."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan bowed to Mme. Bonacieux, darting at her the most
Title:  loving glance that he could possibly concentrate upon her
Title:  charming little person; and while he descended the stairs, he
Title:  heard the door closed and double-locked.  In two bounds he was at
Title:  the Louvre; as he entered the wicket of L'Echelle, ten o'clock
Title:  struck.  All the events we have described had taken place within
Title:  a half hour.
Title:  
Title:  Everything fell out as Mme. Bonacieux prophesied.  On hearing the
Title:  password, Germain bowed.  In a few minutes, Laporte was at the
Title:  lodge; in two words d'Artagnan informed him where Mme. Bonacieux
Title:  was.  Laporte assured himself, by having it twice repeated, of
Title:  the accurate address, and set off at a run.  Hardly, however, had
Title:  he taken ten steps before he returned.
Title:  
Title:  "Young man," said he to d'Artagnan, "a suggestion."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "You may get into trouble by what has taken place."
Title:  
Title:  "You believe so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes.  Have you any friend whose clock is too slow?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Go and call upon him, in order that he may give evidence of your
Title:  having been with him at half past nine.  In a court of justice
Title:  that is called an alibi."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan found his advice prudent.  He took to his heels, and
Title:  was soon at M. de Treville's; but instead of going into the
Title:  saloon with the rest of the crowd, he asked to be introduced to
Title:  M. de Treville's office.  As d'Artagnan so constantly frequented
Title:  the hotel, no difficulty was made in complying with his request,
Title:  and a servant went to inform M. de Treville that his young
Title:  compatriot, having something important to communicate, solicited a
Title:  private audience.  Five minutes after, M. de Treville was asking
Title:  d'Artagnan what he could do to serve him, and what caused his
Title:  visit at so late an hour.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon me, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, who had profited by the
Title:  moment he had been left alone to put back M. de Treville's clock
Title:  three-quarters of an hour, "but I thought, as it was yet only
Title:  twenty-five minutes past nine, it was not too late to wait upon
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "Twenty-five minutes past nine!" cried M. de Treville, looking at
Title:  the clock; "why, that's impossible!"
Title:  
Title:  "Look, rather, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "the clock shows it."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said M. de Treville; "I believed it later.  But
Title:  what can I do for you?"
Title:  
Title:  Then d'Artagnan told M. de Treville a long history about the
Title:  queen.  He expressed to him the fears he entertained with respect
Title:  to her Majesty; he related to him what he had heard of the
Title:  projects of the cardinal with regard to Buckingham, and all with
Title:  a tranquillity and candor of which M. de Treville was the more
Title:  the dupe, from having himself, as we have said, observed
Title:  something fresh between the cardinal, the king, and the queen.
Title:  
Title:  As ten o'clock was striking, d'Artagnan left M. de Treville, who
Title:  thanked him for his information, recommended him to have the
Title:  service of the king and queen always at heart, and returned to
Title:  the saloon; but at the foot of the stairs, d'Artagnan remembered
Title:  he had forgotten his cane.  He consequently sprang up again,
Title:  re-entered the office, with a turn of his finger set the clock
Title:  right again, that it might not be perceived the next day that it
Title:  had been put wrong, and certain from that time that he had a
Title:  witness to prove his alibi, he ran downstairs and soon found
Title:  himself in the street.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  11  IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS
Title:  
Title:  His visit to M. de Treville being paid, the pensive d'Artagnan
Title:  took the longest way homeward.
Title:  
Title:  On what was d'Artagnan thinking, that he strayed thus from his
Title:  path, gazing at the stars of heaven, and sometimes sighing,
Title:  sometimes smiling?
Title:  
Title:  He was thinking of Mme. Bonacieux.  For an apprentice Musketeer
Title:  the young woman was almost an ideal of love.  Pretty, mysterious,
Title:  initiated in almost all the secrets of the court, which reflected
Title:  such a charming gravity over her pleasing features, it might be
Title:  surmised that she was not wholly unmoved; and this is an
Title:  irresistible charm to novices in love.  Moreover, d'Artagnan had
Title:  delivered her from the hands of the demons who wished to search
Title:  and ill treat her; and this important service had established
Title:  between them one of those sentiments of gratitude which so easily
Title:  assume a more tender character.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan already fancied himself, so rapid is the flight of our
Title:  dreams upon the wings of imagination, accosted by a messenger
Title:  from the young woman, who brought him some billet appointing a
Title:  meeting, a gold chain, or a diamond.  We have observed that young
Title:  cavaliers received presents from their king without shame.  Let
Title:  us add that in these times of lax morality they had no more
Title:  delicacy with respect to the mistresses; and that the latter
Title:  almost always left them valuable and durable remembrances, as if
Title:  they essayed to conquer the fragility of their sentiments by the
Title:  solidity of their gifts.
Title:  
Title:  Without a blush, men made their way in the world by the means of
Title:  women blushing.  Such as were only beautiful gave their beauty,
Title:  whence, without doubt, comes the proverb, "The most beautiful
Title:  girl in the world can only give what she has."  Such as were rich
Title:  gave in addition a part of their money; and a vast number of
Title:  heroes of that gallant period may be cited who would neither have
Title:  won their spurs in the first place, nor their battles afterward,
Title:  without the purse, more or less furnished, which their mistress
Title:  fastened to the saddle bow.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan owned nothing.  Provincial diffidence, that slight
Title:  varnish, the ephemeral flower, that down of the peach, had
Title:  evaporated to the winds through the little orthodox counsels
Title:  which the three Musketeers gave their friend.  D'Artagnan,
Title:  following the strange custom of the times, considered himself at
Title:  Paris as on a campaign, neither more nor less than if he had been
Title:  in Flanders--Spain yonder, woman here.  In each there was an
Title:  enemy to contend with, and contributions to be levied.
Title:  
Title:  But, we must say, at the present moment d'Artagnan was ruled by
Title:  a feeling much more noble and disinterested.  The mercer had
Title:  said that he was rich; the young man might easily guess that
Title:  with so weak a man as M. Bonacieux; and interest was almost
Title:  foreign to this commencement of love, which had been the
Title:  consequence of it.  We say ALMOST, for the idea that a young,
Title:  handsome, kind, and witty woman is at the same time rich takes
Title:  nothing from the beginning of love, but on the contrary
Title:  strengthens it.
Title:  
Title:  There are in affluence a crowd of aristocratic cares and caprices
Title:  which are highly becoming to beauty.  A fine and white stocking,
Title:  a silken robe, a lace kerchief, a pretty slipper on the foot, a
Title:  tasty ribbon on the head do not make an ugly woman pretty, but
Title:  they make a pretty woman beautiful, without reckoning the hands,
Title:  which gain by all this; the hands, among women particularly, to
Title:  be beautiful must be idle.
Title:  
Title:  Then d'Artagnan, as the reader, from whom we have not concealed
Title:  the state of his fortune, very well knows--d'Artagnan was not a
Title:  millionaire; he hoped to become one someday, but the time which
Title:  in his own mind he fixed upon for this happy change was still far
Title:  distant.  In the meanwhile, how disheartening to see the woman
Title:  one loves long for those thousands of nothings which constitute a
Title:  woman's happiness, and be unable to give her those thousands of
Title:  nothings.  At least, when the woman is rich and the lover is not,
Title:  that which he cannot offer she offers to herself; and although it
Title:  is generally with her husband's money that she procures herself
Title:  this indulgence, the gratitude for it seldom reverts to him.
Title:  
Title:  Then d'Artagnan, disposed to become the most tender of lovers,
Title:  was at the same time a very devoted friend, In the midst of his
Title:  amorous projects for the mercer's wife, he did not forget his
Title:  friends.  The pretty Mme. Bonacieux was just the woman to walk
Title:  with in the Plain St. Denis or in the fair of St. Germain, in
Title:  company with Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, to whom d'Artagnan had
Title:  often remarked this.  Then one could enjoy charming little
Title:  dinners, where one touches on one side the hand of a friend, and
Title:  on the other the foot of a mistress.  Besides, on pressing
Title:  occasions, in extreme difficulties, d'Artagnan would become the
Title:  preserver of his friends.
Title:  
Title:  And M. Bonacieux? whom d'Artagnan had pushed into the hands of
Title:  the officers, denying him aloud although he had promised in a
Title:  whisper to save him.  We are compelled to admit to our readers
Title:  that d'Artagnan thought nothing about him in any way; or that if
Title:  he did think of him, it was only to say to himself that he was
Title:  very well where he was, wherever it might be.  Love is the most
Title:  selfish of all the passions.
Title:  
Title:  Let our readers reassure themselves.  IF d'Artagnan forgets his
Title:  host, or appears to forget him, under the pretense of not knowing
Title:  where he has been carried, we will not forget him, and we know
Title:  where he is.  But for the moment, let us do as did the amorous
Title:  Gascon; we will see after the worthy mercer later.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, reflecting on his future amours, addressing himself
Title:  to the beautiful night, and smiling at the stars, ascended the
Title:  Rue Cherish-Midi, or Chase-Midi, as it was then called.  As he
Title:  found himself in the quarter in which Aramis lived, he took it
Title:  into his head to pay his friend a visit in order to explain the
Title:  motives which had led him to send Planchet with a request that he
Title:  would come instantly to the mousetrap.  Now, if Aramis had been
Title:  at home when Planchet came to his abode, he had doubtless
Title:  hastened to the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and finding nobody there but
Title:  his other two companions perhaps, they would not be able to
Title:  conceive what all this meant.  This mystery required an
Title:  explanation; at least, so d'Artagnan declared to himself.
Title:  
Title:  He likewise thought this was an opportunity for talking about
Title:  pretty little Mme. Bonacieux, of whom his head, if not his heart,
Title:  was already full.  We must never look for discretion in first
Title:  love.  First love is accompanied by such excessive joy that
Title:  unless the joy be allowed to overflow, it will stifle you.
Title:  
Title:  Paris for two hours past had been dark, and seemed a desert.
Title:  Eleven o'clock sounded from all the clocks of the Faubourg St.
Title:  Germain.  It was delightful weather.  D'Artagnan was passing
Title:  along a lane on the spot where the Rue d'Assas is now situated,
Title:  breathing the balmy emanations which were borne upon the wind
Title:  from the Rue de Vaugirard, and which arose from the gardens
Title:  refreshed by the dews of evening and the breeze of night.  From a
Title:  distance resounded, deadened, however, by good shutters, the
Title:  songs of the tipplers, enjoying themselves in the cabarets
Title:  scattered along the plain.  Arrived at the end of the lane,
Title:  d'Artagnan turned to the left.  The house in which Aramis dwelt
Title:  was situated between the Rue Cassette and the Rue Servandoni.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had just passed the Rue Cassette, and already
Title:  perceived the door of his friend's house, shaded by a mass of
Title:  sycamores and clematis which formed a vast arch opposite the
Title:  front of it, when he perceived something like a shadow issuing
Title:  from the Rue Servandoni.  This something was enveloped in a
Title:  cloak, and d'Artagnan at first believed it was a man; but by the
Title:  smallness of the form, the hesitation of the walk, and the
Title:  indecision of the step, he soon discovered that it was a woman.
Title:  Further, this woman, as if not certain of the house she was
Title:  seeking, lifted up her eyes to look around her, stopped, went
Title:  backward, and then returned again.  D'Artagnan was perplexed.
Title:  
Title:  "Shall I go and offer her my services?" thought he.  "By her step
Title:  she must be young; perhaps she is pretty.  Oh, yes!  But a woman
Title:  who wanders in the streets at this hour only ventures out to meet
Title:  her lover.  If I should disturb a rendezvous, that would not be
Title:  the best means of commencing an acquaintance."
Title:  
Title:  Meantime the young woman continued to advance, counting the
Title:  houses and windows.  This was neither long nor difficult.  There
Title:  were but three hotels in this part of the street; and only two
Title:  windows looking toward the road, one of which was in a pavilion
Title:  parallel to that which Aramis occupied, the other belonging to
Title:  Aramis himself.
Title:  
Title:  "PARIDIEU!" said d'Artagnan to himself, to whose mind the niece
Title:  of the theologian reverted, "PARDIEU, it would be droll if this
Title:  belated dove should be in search of our friend's house.  But on
Title:  my soul, it looks so.  Ah, my dear Aramis, this time I shall find
Title:  you out."  And d'Artagnan, making himself as small as he could,
Title:  concealed himself in the darkest side of the street near a stone
Title:  bench placed at the back of a niche.
Title:  
Title:  The young woman continued to advance; and in addition to the
Title:  lightness of her step, which had betrayed her, she emitted a
Title:  little cough which denoted a sweet voice.  D'Artagnan believed
Title:  this cough to be a signal.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, whether the cough had been answered by a similar
Title:  signal which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker,
Title:  or whether without this aid she saw that she had arrived at the
Title:  end of her journey, she resolutely drew near to Aramis's shutter,
Title:  and tapped, at three equal intervals, with her bent finger.
Title:  
Title:  "This is all very fine, dear Aramis," murmured d'Artagnan.
Title:  "Ah, Monsieur Hypocrite, I understand how you study theology."
Title:  
Title:  The three blows were scarcely struck, when the inside blind was
Title:  opened and a light appeared through the panes of the outside
Title:  shutter.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said the listener, "not through doors, but through
Title:  windows!  Ah, this visit was expected.  We shall see the windows
Title:  open, and the lady enter by escalade.  Very pretty!"
Title:  
Title:  But to the great astonishment of d'Artagnan, the shutter remained
Title:  closed.  Still more, the light which had shone for an instant
Title:  disappeared, and all was again in obscurity.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan thought this could not last long, and continued to
Title:  look with all his eyes and listen with all his ears.
Title:  
Title:  He was right; at the end of some seconds two sharp taps were
Title:  heard inside.  The young woman in the street replied by a single
Title:  tap, and the shutter was opened a little way.
Title:  
Title:  It may be judged whether d'Artagnan looked or listened with
Title:  avidity.  Unfortunately the light had been removed into another
Title:  chamber; but the eyes of the young man were accustomed to the
Title:  night.  Besides, the eyes of the Gascons have, as it is asserted,
Title:  like those of cats, the faculty of seeing in the dark.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan then saw that the young woman took from her pocket a
Title:  white object, which she unfolded quickly, and which took the form
Title:  of a handkerchief.  She made her interlocutor observe the corner
Title:  of this unfolded object.
Title:  
Title:  This immediately recalled to d'Artagnan's mind the handkerchief
Title:  which he had found at the feet of Mme. Bonacieux, which had
Title:  reminded him of that which he had dragged from under the feet of
Title:  Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil could that handkerchief signify?"
Title:  
Title:  Placed where he was, d'Artagnan could not perceive the face of
Title:  Aramis.  We say Aramis, because the young man entertained no
Title:  doubt that it was his friend who held this dialogue from the
Title:  interior with the lady of the exterior.  Curiosity prevailed over
Title:  prudence; and profiting by the preoccupation into which the sight
Title:  of the handkerchief appeared to have plunged the two personages
Title:  now on the scene, he stole from his hiding place, and quick as
Title:  lightning, but stepping with utmost caution, he ran and placed
Title:  himself close to the angle of the wall, from which his eye could
Title:  pierce the interior of Aramis's room.
Title:  
Title:  Upon gaining this advantage d'Artagnan was near uttering a cry of
Title:  surprise; it was not Aramis who was conversing with the nocturnal
Title:  visitor, it was a woman!  D'Artagnan, however, could only see
Title:  enough to recognize the form of her vestments, not enough to
Title:  distinguish her features.
Title:  
Title:  At the same instant the woman inside drew a second handkerchief
Title:  from her pocket, and exchanged it for that which had just been
Title:  shown to her.  Then some words were spoken by the two women.  At
Title:  length the shutter closed.  The woman who was outside the window
Title:  turned round, and passed within four steps of d'Artagnan, pulling
Title:  down the hood of her mantle; but the precaution was too late,
Title:  d'Artagnan had already recognized Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux!  The suspicion that it was she had crossed the
Title:  mind of d'Artagnan when she drew the handkerchief from her
Title:  pocket; but what probability was there that Mme. Bonacieux, who
Title:  had sent for M. Laporte in order to be reconducted to the Louvre,
Title:  should be running about the streets of Paris at half past eleven
Title:  at night, at the risk of being abducted a second time?
Title:  
Title:  This must be, then, an affair of importance; and what is the most
Title:  important affair to a woman of twenty-five!  Love.
Title:  
Title:  But was it on her own account, or on account of another, that she
Title:  exposed herself to such hazards?  This was a question the young
Title:  man asked himself, whom the demon of jealousy already gnawed,
Title:  being in heart neither more nor less than an accepted lover.
Title:  
Title:  There was a very simple means of satisfying himself whither Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux was going; that was to follow her.  This method was so
Title:  simple that d'Artagnan employed it quite naturally and
Title:  instinctively.
Title:  
Title:  But at the sight of the young man, who detached himself from the
Title:  wall like a statue walking from its niche, and at the noise of
Title:  the steps which she heard resound behind her, Mme. Bonacieux
Title:  uttered a little cry and fled.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan ran after her.  It was not difficult for him to
Title:  overtake a woman embarrassed with her cloak.  He came up with her
Title:  before she had traversed a third of the street.  The unfortunate
Title:  woman was exhausted, not by fatigue, but by terror, and when
Title:  d'Artagnan placed his hand upon her shoulder, she sank upon one
Title:  knee, crying in a choking voice, "Kill me, if you please, you
Title:  shall know nothing!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan raised her by passing his arm round her waist; but as
Title:  he felt by her weight she was on the point of fainting, he made
Title:  haste to reassure her by protestations of devotedness.  These
Title:  protestations were nothing for Mme. Bonacieux, for such
Title:  protestations may be made with the worst intentions in the world;
Title:  but the voice was all.  Mme. Bonacieux thought she recognized the
Title:  sound of that voice; she reopened her eyes, cast a quick glance
Title:  upon the man who had terrified her so, and at once perceiving it
Title:  was d'Artagnan, she uttered a cry of joy, "Oh, it is you, it is
Title:  you!  Thank God, thank God!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, it is I," said d'Artagnan, "it is I, whom God has sent to
Title:  watch over you."
Title:  
Title:  "Was it with that intention you followed me?" asked the young
Title:  woman, with a coquettish smile, whose somewhat bantering
Title:  character resumed its influence, and with whom all fear had
Title:  disappeared from the moment in which she recognized a friend in
Title:  one she had taken for an enemy.
Title:  
Title:  "No," said d'Artagnan; "no, I confess it.  It was chance that
Title:  threw me in your way; I saw a woman knocking at the window of one
Title:  of my friends."
Title:  
Title:  "One of your friends?" interrupted Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt; Aramis is one of my best friends."
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis!  Who is he?"
Title:  
Title:  "Come, come, you won't tell me you don't know Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "This is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced."
Title:  
Title:  "It is the first time, then, that you ever went to that house?"
Title:  
Title:  "Undoubtedly."
Title:  
Title:  "And you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "By a Musketeer?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  "It was not he, then, you came to seek?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not the least in the world.  Besides, you must have seen that
Title:  the person to whom I spoke was a woman."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true; but this woman is a friend of Aramis--"
Title:  
Title:  "I know nothing of that."
Title:  
Title:  "--since she lodges with him."
Title:  
Title:  "That does not concern me."
Title:  
Title:  "But who is she?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, that is not my secret."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Madame Bonacieux, you are charming; but at the same time
Title:  you are one of the most mysterious women."
Title:  
Title:  "Do I lose by that?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; you are, on the contrary, adorable."
Title:  
Title:  "Give me your arm, then."
Title:  
Title:  "Most willingly.  And now?"
Title:  
Title:  "Now escort me."
Title:  
Title:  "Where?"
Title:  
Title:  "Where I am going."
Title:  
Title:  "But where are you going?"
Title:  
Title:  "You will see, because you will leave me at the door."
Title:  
Title:  "Shall I wait for you?"
Title:  
Title:  "That will be useless."
Title:  
Title:  "You will return alone, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps yes, perhaps no."
Title:  
Title:  "But will the person who shall accompany you afterward be a man
Title:  or a woman?"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know yet."
Title:  
Title:  "But I will know it!"
Title:  
Title:  "How so?"
Title:  
Title:  "I will wait until you come out."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case, adieu."
Title:  
Title:  "Why so?"
Title:  
Title:  "I do not want you."
Title:  
Title:  "But you have claimed--"
Title:  
Title:  "The aid of a gentleman, not the watchfulness of a spy."
Title:  
Title:  "The word is rather hard."
Title:  
Title:  "How are they called who follow others in spite of them?"
Title:  
Title:  "They are indiscreet."
Title:  
Title:  "The word is too mild."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, madame, I perceive I must do as you wish."
Title:  
Title:  "Why did you deprive yourself of the merit of doing so at once?"
Title:  
Title:  "Is there no merit in repentance?"
Title:  
Title:  "And do you really repent?"
Title:  
Title:  "I know nothing about it myself.  But what I know is that I
Title:  promise to do all you wish if you allow me to accompany you where
Title:  you are going."
Title:  
Title:  "And you will leave me then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Without waiting for my coming out again?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Word of honor?"
Title:  
Title:  "By the faith of a gentleman.  Take my arm, and let us go."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan offered his arm to Mme. Bonacieux, who willingly took
Title:  it, half laughing, half trembling, and both gained the top of Rue
Title:  de la Harpe.  Arriving there, the young woman seemed to hesitate,
Title:  as she had before done in the Rue Vaugirard.  She seemed,
Title:  however, by certain signs, to recognize a door, and approaching
Title:  that door, "And now, monsieur," said she, "it is here I have
Title:  business; a thousand thanks for your honorable company, which has
Title:  saved me from all the dangers to which, alone I was exposed.  But
Title:  the moment is come to keep your word; I have reached my
Title:  destination."
Title:  
Title:  "And you will have nothing to fear on your return?"
Title:  
Title:  "I shall have nothing to fear but robbers."
Title:  
Title:  "And that is nothing?"
Title:  
Title:  "What could they take from me?  I have not a penny about me."
Title:  
Title:  "You forget that beautiful handkerchief with the coat of arms."
Title:  
Title:  "Which?"
Title:  
Title:  "That which I found at your feet, and replaced in your pocket."
Title:  
Title:  "Hold your tongue, imprudent man!  Do you wish to destroy me?"
Title:  
Title:  "You see very plainly that there is still danger for you, since a
Title:  single word makes you tremble; and you confess that if that word
Title:  were heard you would be ruined.  Come, come, madame!" cried
Title:  d'Artagnan, seizing her hands, and surveying her with an ardent
Title:  glance, "come, be more generous.  Confide in me.  Have you not
Title:  read in my eyes that there is nothing but devotion and sympathy
Title:  in my heart?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," replied Mme. Bonacieux; "therefore, ask my own secrets,
Title:  and I will reveal them to you; but those of others--that is quite
Title:  another thing."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well," said d'Artagnan, "I shall discover them; as these
Title:  secrets may have an influence over your life, these secrets must
Title:  become mine."
Title:  
Title:  "Beware of what you do!" cried the young woman, in a manner so
Title:  serious as to make d'Artagnan start in spite of himself.  "Oh,
Title:  meddle in nothing which concerns me.  Do not seek to assist me in
Title:  that which I am accomplishing.  This I ask of you in the name of
Title:  the interest with which I inspire you, in the name of the service
Title:  you have rendered me and which I never shall forget while I have
Title:  life.  Rather, place faith in what I tell you.  Have no more
Title:  concern about me; I exist no longer for you, any more than if you
Title:  had never seen me."
Title:  
Title:  "Must Aramis do as much as I, madame?" said d'Artagnan, deeply
Title:  piqued.
Title:  
Title:  "This is the second or third time, monsieur, that you have
Title:  repeated that name, and yet I have told you that I do not know
Title:  him."
Title:  
Title:  "You do not know the man at whose shutter you have just knocked?
Title:  Indeed, madame, you believe me too credulous!"
Title:  
Title:  "Confess that it is for the sake of making me talk that you
Title:  invent this story and create this personage."
Title:  
Title:  "I invent nothing, madame; I create nothing.  I only speak that
Title:  exact truth."
Title:  
Title:  "And you say that one of your friends lives in that house?"
Title:  
Title:  "I say so, and I repeat it for the third time; that house is one
Title:  inhabited by my friend, and that friend is Aramis."
Title:  
Title:  "All this will be cleared up at a later period," murmured the
Title:  young woman; "no, monsieur, be silent."
Title:  
Title:  "If you could see my heart," said d'Artagnan, "you would there
Title:  read so much curiosity that you would pity me and so much love
Title:  that you would instantly satisfy my curiosity.  We have nothing
Title:  to fear from those who love us."
Title:  
Title:  "You speak very suddenly of love, monsieur," said the young
Title:  woman, shaking her head.
Title:  
Title:  "That is because love has come suddenly upon me, and for the
Title:  first time; and because I am only twenty."
Title:  
Title:  The young woman looked at him furtively.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen; I am already upon the scent," resumed d'Artagnan.
Title:  "About three months ago I was near having a duel with Aramis
Title:  concerning a handkerchief resembling the one you showed to the
Title:  woman in his house--for a handkerchief marked in the same manner,
Title:  I am sure."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said the young woman, "you weary me very much, I
Title:  assure you, with your questions."
Title:  
Title:  "But you, madame, prudent as you are, think, if you were to be
Title:  arrested with that handkerchief, and that handkerchief were to be
Title:  seized, would you not be compromised?"
Title:  
Title:  "In what way?  The initials are only mine--C. B., Constance
Title:  Bonacieux."
Title:  
Title:  "Or Camille de Bois-Tracy."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, monsieur!  Once again, silence!  Ah, since the dangers
Title:  I incur on my own account cannot stop you, think of those you may
Title:  yourself run!"
Title:  
Title:  "Me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; there is peril of imprisonment, risk of life in knowing
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "Then I will not leave you."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur!" said the young woman, supplicating him and clasping
Title:  her hands together, "monsieur, in the name of heaven, by the
Title:  honor of a soldier, by the courtesy of a gentleman, depart!
Title:  There, there midnight sounds!  That is the hour when I am
Title:  expected."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame," said the young man, bowing; "I can refuse nothing asked
Title:  of me thus.  Be content; I will depart."
Title:  
Title:  "But you will not follow me; you will not watch me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I will return home instantly."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, I was quite sure you were a good and brave young man," said
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux, holding out her hand to him, and placing the
Title:  other upon the knocker of a little door almost hidden in the
Title:  wall.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan seized the hand held out to him, and kissed it
Title:  ardently.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  I wish I had never seen you!" cried d'Artagnan, with that
Title:  ingenuous roughness which women often prefer to the affectations
Title:  of politeness, because it betrays the depths of the thought and
Title:  proves that feeling prevails over reason.
Title:  
Title:  "Well!" resumed Mme. Bonacieux, in a voice almost caressing, and
Title:  pressing the hand of d'Artagnan, who had not relinquished hers,
Title:  "well:  I will not say as much as you do; what is lost for today
Title:  may not be lost forever.  Who knows, when I shall be at liberty,
Title:  that I may not satisfy your curiosity?"
Title:  
Title:  "And will you make the same promise to my love?" cried
Title:  d'Artagnan, beside himself with joy.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, as to that, I do not engage myself.  That depends upon the
Title:  sentiments with which you may inspire me."
Title:  
Title:  "Then today, madame--"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, today, I am no further than gratitude."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  You are too charming," said d'Artagnan, sorrowfully; "and
Title:  you abuse my love."
Title:  
Title:  "No, I use your generosity, that's all.  But be of good cheer;
Title:  with certain people, everything comes round."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you render me the happiest of men!  Do not forget this
Title:  evening--do not forget that promise."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied.  In the proper time and place I will remember
Title:  everything.  Now then, go, go, in the name of heaven!  I was
Title:  expected at sharp midnight, and I am late."
Title:  
Title:  "By five minutes."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but in certain circumstances five minutes are five ages."
Title:  
Title:  "When one loves."
Title:  
Title:  "Well!  And who told you I had no affair with a lover?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is a man, then, who expects you?" cried d'Artagnan.  "A man!"
Title:  
Title:  "The discussion is going to begin again!" said Mme. Bonacieux,
Title:  with a half-smile which was not exempt from a tinge of
Title:  impatience.
Title:  
Title:  "No, no; I go, I depart!  I believe in you, and I would have all
Title:  the merit of my devotion, even if that devotion were stupidity.
Title:  Adieu, madame, adieu!"
Title:  
Title:  And as if he only felt strength to detach himself by a violent
Title:  effort from the hand he held, he sprang away, running, while Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux knocked, as at the shutter, three light and regular
Title:  taps.  When he had gained the angle of the street, he turned.
Title:  The door had been opened, and shut again; the mercer's pretty
Title:  wife had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan pursued his way.  He had given his word not to watch
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux, and if his life had depended upon the spot to
Title:  which she was going or upon the person who should accompany her,
Title:  d'Artagnan would have returned home, since he had so promised.
Title:  Five minutes later he was in the Rue des Fossoyeurs.
Title:  
Title:  "Poor Athos!" said he; "he will never guess what all this means.
Title:  He will have fallen asleep waiting for me, or else he will have
Title:  returned home, where he will have learned that a woman had been
Title:  there.  A woman with Athos!  After all," continued d'Artagnan,
Title:  "there was certainly one with Aramis.  All this is very strange;
Title:  and I am curious to know how it will end."
Title:  
Title:  "Badly, monsieur, badly!" replied a voice which the young man
Title:  recognized as that of Planchet; for, soliloquizing aloud, as very
Title:  preoccupied people do, he had entered the alley, at the end of
Title:  which were the stairs which led to his chamber.
Title:  
Title:  "How badly?  What do you mean by that, you idiot?" asked
Title:  d'Artagnan.  "What has happened?"
Title:  
Title:  "All sorts of misfortunes."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "In the first place, Monsieur Athos is arrested."
Title:  
Title:  "Arrested!  Athos arrested!  What for?"
Title:  
Title:  "He was found in your lodging; they took him for you."
Title:  
Title:  "And by whom was he arrested?"
Title:  
Title:  "By Guards brought by the men in black whom you put to flight."
Title:  
Title:  "Why did he not tell them his name?  Why did he not tell them he
Title:  knew nothing about this affair?"
Title:  
Title:  "He took care not to do so, monsieur; on the contrary, he came up
Title:  to me and said, 'It is your master that needs his liberty at this
Title:  moment and not I, since he knows everything and I know nothing.
Title:  They will believe he is arrested, and that will give him time; in
Title:  three days I will tell them who I am, and they cannot fail to let
Title:  me go.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Bravo, Athos!  Noble heart!" murmured d'Artagnan.  "I know him
Title:  well there!  And what did the officers do?"
Title:  
Title:  "Four conveyed him away, I don't know where--to the Bastille or
Title:  Fort l'Eveque.  Two remained with the men in black, who rummaged
Title:  every place and took all the papers.  The last two mounted guard
Title:  at the door during this examination; then, when all was over,
Title:  they went away, leaving the house empty and exposed."
Title:  
Title:  "And Porthos and Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "I could not find them; they did not come."
Title:  
Title:  "But they may come any moment, for you left word that I awaited
Title:  them?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, don't budge, then; if they come, tell them what has
Title:  happened.  Let them wait for me at the Pomme-de-Pin.  Here it
Title:  would be dangerous; the house may be watched.  I will run to
Title:  Monsieur de Treville to tell them all this, and will meet them
Title:  there."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well, monsieur," said Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  "But you will remain; you are not afraid?" said d'Artagnan,
Title:  coming back to recommend courage to his lackey.
Title:  
Title:  "Be easy, monsieur," said Planchet; "you do not know me yet.  I
Title:  am brave when I set about it.  It is all in beginning.  Besides,
Title:  I am a Picard."
Title:  
Title:  "Then it is understood," said d'Artagnan; "you would rather be
Title:  killed than desert your post?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur; and there is nothing I would not do to prove to
Title:  Monsieur that I am attached to him."
Title:  
Title:  "Good!" said d'Artagnan to himself.  "It appears that the method
Title:  I have adopted with this boy is decidedly the best.  I shall use
Title:  it again upon occasion."
Title:  
Title:  And with all the swiftness of his legs, already a little fatigued
Title:  however, with the perambulations of the day, d'Artagnan directed
Title:  his course toward M. de Treville's.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville was not at his hotel.  His company was on guard at
Title:  the Louvre; he was at the Louvre with his company.
Title:  
Title:  It was necessary to reach M. de Treville; it was important that
Title:  he should be informed of what was passing.  D'Artagnan resolved
Title:  to try and enter the Louvre.  His costume of Guardsman in the
Title:  company of M. Dessessart ought to be his passport.
Title:  
Title:  He therefore went down the Rue des Petits Augustins, and came up
Title:  to the quay, in order to take the New Bridge.  He had at first an
Title:  idea of crossing by the ferry; but on gaining the riverside, he
Title:  had mechanically put his hand into his pocket, and perceived that
Title:  he had not wherewithal to pay his passage.
Title:  
Title:  As he gained the top of the Rue Guenegaud, he saw two persons
Title:  coming out of the Rue Dauphine whose appearance very much struck
Title:  him.  Of the two persons who composed this group, one was a man
Title:  and the other a woman.  The woman had the outline of Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux; the man resembled Aramis so much as to be mistaken for
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  Besides, the woman wore that black mantle which d'Artagnan could
Title:  still see outlined on the shutter of the Rue de Vaugirard and on
Title:  the door of the Rue de la Harpe; still further, the man wore the
Title:  uniform of a Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  The woman's hood was pulled down, and the man held a handkerchief
Title:  to his face.  Both, as this double precaution indicated, had an
Title:  interest in not being recognized.
Title:  
Title:  They took the bridge.  That was d'Artagnan's road, as he was
Title:  going to the Louvre.  D'Artagnan followed them.
Title:  
Title:  He had not gone twenty steps before he became convinced that the
Title:  woman was really Mme. Bonacieux and that the man was Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  He felt at that instant all the suspicions of jealousy agitating
Title:  his heart.  He felt himself doubly betrayed, by his friend and by
Title:  her whom he already loved like a mistress.  Mme. Bonacieux had
Title:  declared to him, by all the gods, that she did not know Aramis;
Title:  and a quarter of an hour after having made this assertion, he
Title:  found her hanging on the arm of Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan did not reflect that he had only known the mercer's
Title:  pretty wife for three hours; that she owed him nothing but a
Title:  little gratitude for having delivered her from the men in black,
Title:  who wished to carry her off, and that she had promised him
Title:  nothing.  He considered himself an outraged, betrayed, and
Title:  ridiculed lover.  Blood and anger mounted to his face; he was
Title:  resolved to unravel the mystery.
Title:  
Title:  The young man and young woman perceived they were watched, and
Title:  redoubled their speed.  D'Artagnan determined upon his course.
Title:  He passed them, then returned so as to meet them exactly before
Title:  the Samaritaine. Which was illuminated by a lamp which threw its
Title:  light over all that part of the bridge.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan stopped before them, and they stopped before him.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you want, monsieur?" demanded the Musketeer, recoiling a
Title:  step, and with a foreign accent, which proved to d'Artagnan that
Title:  he was deceived in one of his conjectures.
Title:  
Title:  "It is not Aramis!" cried he.
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur, it is not Aramis; and by your exclamation I
Title:  perceive you have mistaken me for another, and pardon you."
Title:  
Title:  "You pardon me?" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," replied the stranger.  "Allow me, then, to pass on, since
Title:  it is not with me you have anything to do."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right, monsieur, it is not with you that I have anything
Title:  to do; it is with Madame."
Title:  
Title:  "With Madame!  You do not know her," replied the stranger.
Title:  
Title:  "You are deceived, monsieur; I know her very well."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said Mme. Bonacieux; in a tone of reproach, "ah, monsieur,
Title:  I had your promise as a soldier and your word as a gentleman.  I
Title:  hoped to be able to rely upon that."
Title:  
Title:  "And I, madame!" said d'Artagnan, embarrassed; "you promised me--"
Title:  
Title:  "Take my arm, madame," said the stranger, "and let us continue
Title:  our way."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, however, stupefied, cast down, annihilated by all
Title:  that happened, stood, with crossed arms, before the Musketeer and
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  The Musketeer advanced two steps, and pushed d'Artagnan aside
Title:  with his hand.  D'Artagnan made a spring backward and drew his
Title:  sword.  At the same time, and with the rapidity of lightning, the
Title:  stranger drew his.
Title:  
Title:  "In the name of heaven, my Lord!" cried Mme. Bonacieux, throwing
Title:  herself between the combatants and seizing the swords with her
Title:  hands.
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord!" cried d'Artagnan, enlightened by a sudden idea, "my
Title:  Lord!  Pardon me, monsieur, but you are not--"
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord the Duke of Buckingham," said Mme. Bonacieux, in an
Title:  undertone; "and now you may ruin us all."
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, Madame, I ask a hundred pardons!  But I love her, my
Title:  Lord, and was jealous.  You know what it is to love, my Lord.
Title:  Pardon me, and then tell me how I can risk my life to serve your
Title:  Grace?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are a brave young man," said Buckingham, holding out his
Title:  hand to d'Artagnan, who pressed it respectfully.  "You offer me
Title:  your services; with the same frankness I accept them.  Follow us
Title:  at a distance of twenty paces, as far as the Louvre, and if
Title:  anyone watches us, slay him!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan placed his naked sword under his arm, allowed the duke
Title:  and Mme. Bonacieux to take twenty steps ahead, and then followed
Title:  them, ready to execute the instructions of the noble and elegant
Title:  minister of Charles I.
Title:  
Title:  Fortunately, he had no opportunity to give the duke this proof of
Title:  his devotion, and the young woman and the handsome Musketeer
Title:  entered the Louvre by the wicket of the Echelle without any
Title:  interference.
Title:  
Title:  As for d'Artagnan, he immediately repaired to the cabaret of the
Title:  Pomme-de-Pin, where he found Porthos and Aramis awaiting him.
Title:  Without giving them any explanation of the alarm and
Title:  inconvenience he had caused them, he told them that he had
Title:  terminated the affair alone in which he had for a moment believed
Title:  he should need their assistance.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, carried away as we are by our narrative, we must leave
Title:  our three friends to themselves, and follow the Duke of
Title:  Buckingham and his guide through the labyrinths of the Louvre.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  12  GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux and the duke entered the Louvre without
Title:  difficulty.  Mme. Bonacieux was known to belong to the queen; the
Title:  duke wore the uniform of the Musketeers of M. de Treville, who,
Title:  as we have said, were that evening on guard.  Besides, Germain
Title:  was in the interests of the queen; and if anything should happen,
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux would be accused of having introduced her lover
Title:  into the Louvre, that was all.  She took the risk upon herself.
Title:  Her reputation would be lost, it is true; but of what value in
Title:  the world was the reputation of the little wife of a mercer?
Title:  
Title:  Once within the interior of the court, the duke and the young
Title:  woman followed the wall for the space of about twenty-five steps.
Title:  This space passed, Mme. Bonacieux pushed a little servants' door,
Title:  open by day but generally closed at night.  The door yielded.
Title:  Both entered, and found themselves in darkness; but Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux was acquainted with all the turnings and windings of
Title:  this part of the Louvre, appropriated for the people of the
Title:  household.  She closed the door after her, took the duke by the
Title:  hand, and after a few experimental steps, grasped a balustrade,
Title:  put her foot upon the bottom step, and began to ascend the
Title:  staircase.  The duke counted two stories.  She then turned to the
Title:  right, followed the course of a long corridor, descended a
Title:  flight, went a few steps farther, introduced a key into a lock,
Title:  opened a door, and pushed the duke into an apartment lighted only
Title:  by a lamp, saying, "Remain here, my Lord Duke; someone will
Title:  come."  She then went out by the same door, which she locked, so
Title:  that the duke found himself literally a prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, isolated as he was, we must say that the Duke of
Title:  Buckingham did not experience an instant of fear.  One of the
Title:  salient points of his character was the search for adventures and
Title:  a love of romance.  Brave, rash, and enterprising, this was not
Title:  the first time he had risked his life in such attempts.  He had
Title:  learned that the pretended message from Anne of Austria, upon the
Title:  faith of which he had come to Paris, was a snare; but instead of
Title:  regaining England, he had, abusing the position in which he had
Title:  been placed, declared to the queen that he would not depart
Title:  without seeing her.  The queen had at first positively refused;
Title:  but at length became afraid that the duke, if exasperated, would
Title:  commit some folly.  She had already decided upon seeing him and
Title:  urging his immediate departure, when, on the very evening of
Title:  coming to this decision, Mme. Bonacieux, who was charged with
Title:  going to fetch the duke and conducting him to the Louvre, was
Title:  abducted.  For two days no one knew what had become of her, and
Title:  everything remained in suspense; but once free, and placed in
Title:  communication with Laporte, matters resumed their course, and she
Title:  accomplished the perilous enterprise which, but for her arrest,
Title:  would have been executed three days earlier.
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham, left alone, walked toward a mirror.  His Musketeer's
Title:  uniform became him marvelously.
Title:  
Title:  At thirty-five, which was then his age, he passed, with just
Title:  title, for the handsomest gentleman and the most elegant cavalier
Title:  of France or England.
Title:  
Title:  The favorite of two kings, immensely rich, all-powerful in a
Title:  kingdom which he disordered at his fancy and calmed again at his
Title:  caprice, George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, had lived one of
Title:  those fabulous existences which survive, in the course of
Title:  centuries, to astonish posterity.
Title:  
Title:  Sure of himself, convinced of his own power, certain that the
Title:  laws which rule other men could not reach him, he went straight
Title:  to the object he aimed at, even were this object were so elevated
Title:  and so dazzling that it would have been madness for any other
Title:  even to have contemplated it.  It was thus he had succeeded in
Title:  approaching several times the beautiful and proud Anne of
Title:  Austria, and in making himself loved by dazzling her.
Title:  
Title:  George Villiers placed himself before the glass, as we have said,
Title:  restored the undulations to his beautiful hair, which the weight
Title:  of his hat had disordered, twisted his mustache, and, his heart
Title:  swelling with joy, happy and proud at being near the moment he
Title:  had so long sighed for, he smiled upon himself with pride and
Title:  hope.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment a door concealed in the tapestry opened, and a
Title:  woman appeared.  Buckingham saw this apparition in the glass; he
Title:  uttered a cry.  It was the queen!
Title:  
Title:  Anne of Austria was then twenty-six or twenty-seven years of age;
Title:  that is to say, she was in the full splendor of her beauty.
Title:  
Title:  Her carriage was that of a queen or a goddess; her eyes, which
Title:  cast the brilliancy of emeralds, were perfectly beautiful, and
Title:  yet were at the same time full of sweetness and majesty.
Title:  
Title:  Her mouth was small and rosy; and although her underlip, like
Title:  that of all princes of the House of Austria, protruded slightly
Title:  beyond the other, it was eminently lovely in its smile, but as
Title:  profoundly disdainful in its contempt.
Title:  
Title:  Her skin was admired for its velvety softness; her hands and arms
Title:  were of surpassing beauty, all the poets of the time singing them
Title:  as incomparable.
Title:  
Title:  Lastly, her hair, which, from being light in her youth, had
Title:  become chestnut, and which she wore curled very plainly, and with
Title:  much powder, admirably set off her face, in which the most rigid
Title:  critic could only have desired a little less rouge, and the most
Title:  fastidious sculptor a little more fineness in the nose.
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham remained for a moment dazzled.  Never had Anne of
Title:  Austria appeared to him so beautiful, amid balls, fetes, or
Title:  carousals, as she appeared to him at this moment, dressed in a
Title:  simple robe of white satin, and accompanied by Donna Estafania--
Title:  the only one of her Spanish women who had not been driven from
Title:  her by the jealousy of the king or by the persecutions of
Title:  Richelieu.
Title:  
Title:  Anne of Austria took two steps forward.  Buckingham threw himself
Title:  at her feet, and before the queen could prevent him, kissed the
Title:  hem of her robe.
Title:  
Title:  "Duke, you already know that it is not I who caused you to be
Title:  written to."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, madame!  Yes, your Majesty!" cried the duke. "I know
Title:  that I must have been mad, senseless, to believe that snow would
Title:  become animated or marble warm; but what then!  They who love
Title:  believe easily in love.  Besides, I have lost nothing by this
Title:  journey because I see you."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," replied Anne, "but you know why and how I see you;
Title:  because, insensible to all my sufferings, you persist in
Title:  remaining in a city where, by remaining, you run the risk of your
Title:  life, and make me run the risk of my honor.  I see you to tell
Title:  you that everything separates us--the depths of the sea, the
Title:  enmity of kingdoms, the sanctity of vows.  It is sacrilege to
Title:  struggle against so many things, my Lord.  In short, I see you to
Title:  tell you that we must never see each other again."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak on, madame, speak on, Queen," said Buckingham; "the
Title:  sweetness of your voice covers the harshness of your words.  You
Title:  talk of sacrilege!  Why, the sacrilege is the separation of two
Title:  hearts formed by God for each other."
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord," cried the queen, "you forget that I have never said
Title:  that I love you."
Title:  
Title:  "But you have never told me that you did not love me; and truly,
Title:  to speak such words to me would be, on the part of your Majesty,
Title:  too great an ingratitude.  For tell me, where can you find a love
Title:  like mine--a love which neither time, nor absence, nor despair
Title:  can extinguish, a love which contents itself with a lost ribbon,
Title:  a stray look, or a chance word?  It is now three years, madame,
Title:  since I saw you for the first time, and during those three years
Title:  I have loved you thus.  Shall I tell you each ornament of your
Title:  toilet?  Mark!  I see you now.  You were seated upon cushions in
Title:  the Spanish fashion; you wore a robe of green satin embroidered
Title:  with gold and silver, hanging sleeves knotted upon your beautiful
Title:  arms--those lovely arms--with large diamonds.  You wore a close
Title:  ruff, a small cap upon your head of the same color as your robe,
Title:  and in that cap a heron's feather.  Hold!  Hold!  I shut my eyes,
Title:  and I can see you as you then were; I open them again, and I see
Title:  what you are now--a hundred time more beautiful!"
Title:  
Title:  "What folly," murmured Anne of Austria, who had not the courage
Title:  to find fault with the duke for having so well preserved her
Title:  portrait in his heart, "what folly to feed a useless passion with
Title:  such remembrances!"
Title:  
Title:  "And upon what then must I live?  I have nothing but memory.  It
Title:  is my happiness, my treasure, my hope.  Every time I see you is a
Title:  fresh diamond which I enclose in the casket of my heart.  This
Title:  is the fourth which you have let fall and I have picked up; for
Title:  in three years, madame, I have only seen you four times--the
Title:  first, which I have described to you; the second, at the mansion
Title:  of Madame de Chevreuse; the third, in the gardens of Amiens."
Title:  
Title:  "Duke," said the queen, blushing, "never speak of that evening."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, let us speak of it; on the contrary, let us speak of it!
Title:  That is the most happy and brilliant evening of my life!  You
Title:  remember what a beautiful night it was?  How soft and perfumed
Title:  was the air; how lovely the blue heavens and star-enameled sky!
Title:  Ah, then, madame, I was able for one instant to be alone with
Title:  you.  Then you were about to tell me all--the isolation of your
Title:  life, the griefs of your heart.  You leaned upon my arm--upon
Title:  this, madame!  I felt, in bending my head toward you, your
Title:  beautiful hair touch my cheek; and every time that it touched me
Title:  I trembled from head to foot.  Oh, Queen!  Queen!  You do not
Title:  know what felicity from heaven, what joys from paradise, are
Title:  comprised in a moment like that.  Take my wealth, my fortune, my
Title:  glory, all the days I have to live, for such an instant, for a
Title:  night like that.  For that night, madame, that night you loved
Title:  me, I will swear it."
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, yes; it is possible that the influence of the place,
Title:  the charm of the beautiful evening, the fascination of your
Title:  look--the thousand circumstances, in short, which sometimes unite
Title:  to destroy a woman--were grouped around me on that fatal evening;
Title:  but, my Lord, you saw the queen come to the aid of the woman who
Title:  faltered.  At the first word you dared to utter, at the first
Title:  freedom to which I had to reply, I called for help."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, that is true.  And any other love but mine would have
Title:  sunk beneath this ordeal; but my love came out from it more
Title:  ardent and more eternal.  You believed that you would fly from me
Title:  by returning to Paris; you believed that I would not dare to quit
Title:  the treasure over which my master had charged me to watch.  What
Title:  to me were all the treasures in the world, or all the kings of
Title:  the earth!  Eight days after, I was back again, madame.  That
Title:  time you had nothing to say to me; I had risked my life and favor
Title:  to see you but for a second.  I did not even touch your hand, and
Title:  you pardoned me on seeing me so submissive and so repentant."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which I took
Title:  no part, as you well know, my Lord.  The king, excited by the
Title:  cardinal, made a terrible clamor.  Madame de Vernet was driven
Title:  from me, Putange was exiled, Madame de Chevreuse fell into
Title:  disgrace, and when you wished to come back as ambassador to
Title:  France, the king himself--remember, my lord--the king himself
Title:  opposed to it."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, and France is about to pay for her king's refusal with a
Title:  war.  I am not allowed to see you, madame, but you shall every
Title:  day hear of me.  What object, think you, have this expedition to
Title:  Re and this league with the Protestants of La Rochelle which I am
Title:  projecting?  The pleasure of seeing you.  I have no hope of
Title:  penetrating, sword in hand, to Paris, I know that well.  But this
Title:  war may bring round a peace; this peace will require a
Title:  negotiator; that negotiator will be me.  They will not dare to
Title:  refuse me then; and I will return to Paris, and will see you
Title:  again, and will be happy for an instant.  Thousands of men, it is
Title:  true, will have to pay for my happiness with their lives; but
Title:  what is that to me, provided I see you again!  All this is
Title:  perhaps folly--perhaps insanity; but tell me what woman has a
Title:  lover more truly in love; what queen a servant more ardent?"
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, my Lord, you invoke in your defense things which accuse
Title:  you more strongly.  All these proofs of love which you would give
Title:  me are almost crimes."
Title:  
Title:  "Because you do not love me, madame!  If you loved me, you would
Title:  view all this otherwise.  If you loved me, oh, if you loved me,
Title:  that would be too great happiness, and I should run mad.  Ah,
Title:  Madame de Chevreuse was less cruel than you.  Holland loved her,
Title:  and she responded to his love."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame de Chevreuse was not queen," murmured Anne of Austria,
Title:  overcome, in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound a
Title:  passion.
Title:  
Title:  "You would love me, then, if you were not queen!  Madame, say
Title:  that you would love me then!  I can believe that it is the
Title:  dignity of your rank alone which makes you cruel to me; I can
Title:  believe that you had been Madame de Chevreuse, poor Buckingham
Title:  might have hoped.  Thanks for those sweet words!  Oh, my
Title:  beautiful sovereign, a hundred times, thanks!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my Lord!  You have ill understood, wrongly interpreted; I
Title:  did not mean to say--"
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, silence!" cried the duke.  "If I am happy in an error,
Title:  do not have the cruelty to lift me from it.  You have told me
Title:  yourself, madame, that I have been drawn into a snare; I,
Title:  perhaps, may leave my life in it--for, although it may be
Title:  strange, I have for some time had a presentiment that I should
Title:  shortly die."  And the duke smiled, with a smile at once sad and
Title:  charming.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!" cried Anne of Austria, with an accent of terror
Title:  which proved how much greater an interest she took in the duke
Title:  than she ventured to tell.
Title:  
Title:  "I do not tell you this, madame, to terrify you; no, it is even
Title:  ridiculous for me to name it to you, and, believe me, I take no
Title:  heed of such dreams.  But the words you have just spoken, the
Title:  hope you have almost given me, will have richly paid all--were it
Title:  my life."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, but I," said Anne, "I also, duke, have had presentiments; I
Title:  also have had dreams.  I dreamed that I saw you lying bleeding,
Title:  wounded."
Title:  
Title:  "In the left side, was it not, and with a knife?" interrupted
Title:  Buckingham.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, it was so, my Lord, it was so--in the left side, and with a
Title:  knife.  Who can possibly have told you I had had that dream?  I
Title:  have imparted it to no one but my God, and that in my prayers."
Title:  
Title:  "I ask for no more.  You love me, madame; it is enough."
Title:  
Title:  "I love you, I?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes.  Would God send the same dreams to you as to me if you
Title:  did not love me?  Should we have the same presentiments if our
Title:  existences did not touch at the heart?  You love me, my beautiful
Title:  queen, and you will weep for me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God!" cried Anne of Austria, "this is more than I
Title:  can bear.  In the name of heaven, Duke, leave me, go!  I do not
Title:  know whether I love you or love you not; but what I know is that
Title:  I will not be perjured.  Take pity on me, then, and go!  Oh, if
Title:  you are struck in France, if you die in France, if I could imagine
Title:  that your love for me was the cause of your death, I could not
Title:  console myself; I should run mad.  Depart then, depart, I implore
Title:  you!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, how beautiful you are thus!  Oh, how I love you!" said
Title:  Buckingham.
Title:  
Title:  "Go, go, I implore you, and return hereafter!  Come back as
Title:  ambassador, come back as minister, come back surrounded with
Title:  guards who will defend you, with servants who will watch over
Title:  you, and then I shall no longer fear for your days, and I shall
Title:  be happy in seeing you."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, is this true what you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, then, some pledge of your indulgence, some object which came
Title:  from you, and may remind me that I have not been dreaming;
Title:  something you have worn, and that I may wear in my turn--a ring,
Title:  a necklace, a chain."
Title:  
Title:  "Will you depart--will you depart, if I give you that you
Title:  demand?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "This very instant?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "You will leave France, you will return to England?"
Title:  
Title:  "I will, I swear to you."
Title:  
Title:  "Wait, then, wait."
Title:  
Title:  Anne of Austria re-entered her apartment, and came out again
Title:  almost immediately, holding a rosewood casket in her hand, with
Title:  her cipher encrusted with gold.
Title:  
Title:  "Here, my Lord, here," said she, "keep this in memory of me."
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham took the casket, and fell a second time on his knees.
Title:  
Title:  "You have promised me to go," said the queen.
Title:  
Title:  "And I keep my word.  Your hand, madame, your hand, and I
Title:  depart!"
Title:  
Title:  Anne of Austria stretched forth her hand, closing her eyes, and
Title:  leaning with the other upon Estafania, for she felt that her
Title:  strength was about to fail her.
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand,
Title:  and then rising, said, "Within six months, if I am not dead, I
Title:  shall have seen you again, madame--even if I have to overturn the
Title:  world."  And faithful to the promise he had made, he rushed out
Title:  of the apartment.
Title:  
Title:  In the corridor he met Mme. Bonacieux, who waited for him, and
Title:  who, with the same precautions and the same good luck, conducted
Title:  him out of the Louvre.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  13  MONSIEUR BONACIEUX
Title:  
Title:  There was in all this, as may have been observed, one personage
Title:  concerned, of whom, notwithstanding his precarious position, we
Title:  have appeared to take but very little notice.  This personage was
Title:  M. Bonacieux, the respectable martyr of the political and amorous
Title:  intrigues which entangled themselves so nicely together at this
Title:  gallant and chivalric period.
Title:  
Title:  Fortunately, the reader may remember, or may not remember--
Title:  fortunately we have promised not to lose sight of him.
Title:  
Title:  The officers who arrested him conducted him straight to the
Title:  Bastille, where he passed trembling before a party of soldiers
Title:  who were loading their muskets.  Thence, introduced into a half-
Title:  subterranean gallery, he became, on the part of those who had
Title:  brought him, the object of the grossest insults and the harshest
Title:  treatment.  The officers perceived that they had not to deal with
Title:  a gentleman, and they treated him like a very peasant.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of half an hour or thereabouts, a clerk came to put an
Title:  end to his tortures, but not to his anxiety, by giving the order
Title:  to conduct M. Bonacieux to the Chamber of Examination.
Title:  Ordinarily, prisoners were interrogated in their cells; but they
Title:  did not do so with M. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  Two guards attended the mercer who made him traverse a court and
Title:  enter a corridor in which were three sentinels, opened a door and
Title:  pushed him unceremoniously into a low room, where the only
Title:  furniture was a table, a chair, and a commissary.  The commissary
Title:  was seated in the chair, and was writing at the table.
Title:  
Title:  The two guards led the prisoner toward the table, and upon a sign
Title:  from the commissary drew back so far as to be unable to hear
Title:  anything.
Title:  
Title:  The commissary, who had till this time held his head down over
Title:  his papers, looked up to see what sort of person he had to do
Title:  with.  This commissary was a man of very repulsive mien, with a
Title:  pointed nose, with yellow and salient cheek bones, with eyes
Title:  small but keen and penetrating, and an expression of countenance
Title:  resembling at once the polecat and the fox.  His head, supported
Title:  by a long and flexible neck, issued from his large black robe,
Title:  balancing itself with a motion very much like that of the
Title:  tortoise thrusting his head out of his shell.  He began by asking
Title:  M. Bonacieux his name, age, condition, and abode.
Title:  
Title:  The accused replied that his name was Jacques Michel Bonacieux,
Title:  that he was fifty-one years old, a retired mercer, and lived Rue
Title:  des Fossoyeurs, No. 14.
Title:  
Title:  The commissary then, instead of continuing to interrogate him,
Title:  made him a long speech upon the danger there is for an obscure
Title:  citizen to meddle with public matters.  He complicated this
Title:  exordium by an exposition in which he painted the power and the
Title:  deeds of the cardinal, that incomparable minister, that conqueror
Title:  of past ministers, that example for ministers to come--deeds and
Title:  power which none could thwart with impunity.
Title:  
Title:  After this second part of his discourse, fixing his hawk's eye
Title:  upon poor Bonacieux, he bade him reflect upon the gravity of his
Title:  situation.
Title:  
Title:  The reflections of the mercer were already made; he cursed the
Title:  instant when M. Laporte formed the idea of marrying him to his
Title:  goddaughter, and particularly the moment when that goddaughter
Title:   had been received as Lady of the Linen to her Majesty.
Title:  
Title:  At bottom the character of M. Bonacieux was one of profound
Title:  selfishness mixed with sordid avarice, the whole seasoned with
Title:  extreme cowardice.  The love with which his young wife had
Title:  inspired him was a secondary sentiment, and was not strong enough
Title:  to contend with the primitive feelings we have just enumerated.
Title:  Bonacieux indeed reflected on what had just been said to him.
Title:  
Title:  "But, Monsieur Commissary," said he, calmly, "believe that I know
Title:  and appreciate, more than anybody, the merit of the incomparable
Title:  eminence by whom we have the honor to be governed."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed?" asked the commissary, with an air of doubt.  "If that
Title:  is really so, how came you in the Bastille?"
Title:  
Title:  "How I came there, or rather why I am there," replied Bonacieux,
Title:  "that is entirely impossible for me to tell you, because I don't
Title:  know myself; but to a certainty it is not for having, knowingly
Title:  at least, disobliged Monsieur the Cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "You must, nevertheless, have committed a crime, since you are
Title:  here and are accused of high treason."
Title:  
Title:  "Of high treason!" cried Bonacieux, terrified; "of high treason!
Title:  How is it possible for a poor mercer, who detests Huguenots and
Title:  who abhors Spaniards, to be accused of high treason?  Consider,
Title:  monsieur, the thing is absolutely impossible."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Bonacieux," said the commissary, looking at the accused
Title:  as if his little eyes had the faculty of reading to the very
Title:  depths of hearts, "you have a wife?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," replied the mercer, in a tremble, feeling that
Title:  it was at this point affairs were likely to become perplexing;
Title:  "that is to say, I HAD one."
Title:  
Title:  "What, you 'had one'?  What have you done with her, then, if you
Title:  have her no longer?"
Title:  
Title:  "They have abducted her, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "They have abducted her?  Ah!"
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux inferred from this "Ah" that the affair grew more and
Title:  more intricate.
Title:  
Title:  "They have abducted her," added the commissary; "and do you know
Title:  the man who has committed this deed?"
Title:  
Title:  "I think I know him."
Title:  
Title:  "Who is he?"
Title:  
Title:  "Remember that I affirm nothing, Monsieur the Commissary, and
Title:  that I only suspect."
Title:  
Title:  "Whom do you suspect?  Come, answer freely."
Title:  
Title:  M. Bonacieux was in the greatest perplexity possible.  Had he
Title:  better deny everything or tell everything?  By denying all, it
Title:  might be suspected that he must know too much to avow; by
Title:  confessing all he might prove his good will.  He decided, then,
Title:  to tell all.
Title:  
Title:  "I suspect," said he, "a tall, dark man, of lofty carriage, who
Title:  has the air of a great lord.  He has followed us several times,
Title:  as I think, when I have waited for my wife at the wicket of the
Title:  Louvre to escort her home."
Title:  
Title:  The commissary now appeared to experience a little uneasiness.
Title:  
Title:  "And his name?" said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, as to his name, I know nothing about it; but if I were ever
Title:  to meet him, I should recognize him in an instant, I will answer
Title:  for it, were he among a thousand persons."
Title:  
Title:  The face of the commissary grew still darker.
Title:  
Title:  "You should recognize him among a thousand, say you?" continued
Title:  he.
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say," cried Bonacieux, who saw he had taken a false
Title:  step, "that is to say--"
Title:  
Title:  "You have answered that you should recognize him," said the
Title:  commissary.  "That is all very well, and enough for today; before
Title:  we proceed further, someone must be informed that you know the
Title:  ravisher of your wife."
Title:  
Title:  "But I have not told you that I know him!" cried Bonacieux, in
Title:  despair.  "I told you, on the contrary--"
Title:  
Title:  "Take away the prisoner," said the commissary to the two guards.
Title:  
Title:  "Where must we place him?" demanded the chief.
Title:  
Title:  "In a dungeon."
Title:  
Title:  "Which?"
Title:  
Title:  "Good Lord!  In the first one handy, provided it is safe," said
Title:  the commissary, with an indifference which penetrated poor
Title:  Bonacieux with horror.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, alas!" said he to himself, "misfortune is over my head; my
Title:  wife must have committed some frightful crime.  They believe me
Title:  her accomplice, and will punish me with her.  She must have
Title:  spoken; she must have confessed everything--a woman is so weak!
Title:  A dungeon!  The first he comes to!  That's it!  A night is soon
Title:  passed; and tomorrow to the wheel, to the gallows!  Oh, my God,
Title:  my God, have pity on me!"
Title:  
Title:  Without listening the least in the world to the lamentations of
Title:  M. Bonacieux--lamentations to which, besides, they must have been
Title:  pretty well accustomed--the two guards took the prisoner each by
Title:  an arm, and led him away, while the commissary wrote a letter in
Title:  haste and dispatched it by an officer in waiting.
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux could not close his eyes; not because his dungeon was
Title:  so very disagreeable, but because his uneasiness was so great.
Title:  He sat all night on his stool, starting at the least noise; and
Title:  when the first rays of the sun penetrated into his chamber, the
Title:  dawn itself appeared to him to have taken funereal tints.
Title:  
Title:  All at once he heard his bolts drawn, and made a terrified bound.
Title:  He believed they were come to conduct him to the scaffold; so
Title:  that when he saw merely and simply, instead of the executioner he
Title:  expected, only his commissary of the preceding evening, attended
Title:  by his clerk, he was ready to embrace them both.
Title:  
Title:  "Your affair has become more complicated since yesterday evening,
Title:  my good man, and I advise you to tell the whole truth; for your
Title:  repentance alone can remove the anger of the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, I am ready to tell everything," cried Bonacieux, "at least,
Title:  all that I know.  Interrogate me, I entreat you!"
Title:  
Title:  "Where is your wife, in the first place?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, did not I tell you she had been stolen from me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but yesterday at five o'clock in the afternoon, thanks to
Title:  you, she escaped."
Title:  
Title:  "My wife escaped!" cried Bonacieux.  "Oh, unfortunate creature!
Title:  Monsieur, if she has escaped, it is not my fault, I swear."
Title:  
Title:  "What business had you, then, to go into the chamber of Monsieur
Title:  d'Artagnan, your neighbor, with whom you had a long conference
Title:  during the day?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, yes, Monsieur Commissary; yes, that is true, and I confess
Title:  that I was in the wrong.  I did go to Monsieur d'Artagnan's."
Title:  
Title:  "What was the aim of that visit?"
Title:  
Title:  "To beg him to assist me in finding my wife.  I believed I had a
Title:  right to endeavor to find her.  I was deceived, as it appears,
Title:  and I ask your pardon."
Title:  
Title:  "And what did Monsieur d'Artagnan reply?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur d'Artagnan promised me his assistance; but I soon found
Title:  out that he was betraying me."
Title:  
Title:  "You impose upon justice.  Monsieur d'Artagnan made a compact
Title:  with you; and in virtue of that compact put to flight the police
Title:  who had arrested your wife, and has placed her beyond reach."
Title:  
Title:  "Fortunately, Monsieur d'Artagnan is in our hands, and you shall
Title:  be confronted with him."
Title:  
Title:  "By my faith, I ask no better," cried Bonacieux; "I shall not be
Title:  sorry to see the face of an acquaintance."
Title:  
Title:  "Bring in the Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the commissary to the
Title:  guards.  The two guards led in Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur d'Artagnan," said the commissary, addressing Athos,
Title:  "declare all that passed yesterday between you and Monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "But," cried Bonacieux, "this is not Monsieur d'Artagnan whom you
Title:  show me."
Title:  
Title:  "What!  Not Monsieur d'Artagnan?" exclaimed the commissary.
Title:  
Title:  "Not the least in the world," replied Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "What is this gentleman's name?" asked the commissary.
Title:  
Title:  "I cannot tell you; I don't know him."
Title:  
Title:  "How!  You don't know him?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "Did you never see him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I have seen him, but I don't know what he calls himself."
Title:  
Title:  "Your name?" replied the commissary.
Title:  
Title:  "Athos," replied the Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "But that is not a man's name; that is the name of a mountain,"
Title:  cried the poor questioner, who began to lose his head.
Title:  
Title:  "That is my name," said Athos, quietly.
Title:  
Title:  "But you said that your name was d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "Who, I?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, you."
Title:  
Title:  "Somebody said to me, 'You are Monsieur d'Artagnan?' I answered,
Title:  'You think so?'  My guards exclaimed that they were sure of it.
Title:  I did not wish to contradict them; besides, I might be deceived."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, you insult the majesty of justice."
Title:  
Title:  "Not at all," said Athos, calmly.
Title:  
Title:  "You are Monsieur d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "You see, monsieur, that you say it again."
Title:  
Title:  "But I tell you, Monsieur Commissary," cried Bonacieux, in his
Title:  turn, "there is not the least doubt about the matter.  Monsieur
Title:  d'Artagnan is my tenant, although he does not pay me my rent--and
Title:  even better on that account ought I to know him.  Monsieur
Title:  d'Artagnan is a young man, scarcely nineteen or twenty, and this
Title:  gentleman must be thirty at least.  Monsieur d'Artagnan is in
Title:  Monsieur Dessessart's Guards, and this gentleman is in the company of
Title:  Monsieur de Treville's Musketeers.  Look at his uniform, Monsieur
Title:  Commissary, look at his uniform!"
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," murmured the commissary; "PARDIEU, that's true."
Title:  
Title:  At this moment the door was opened quickly, and a messenger,
Title:  introduced by one of the gatekeepers of the Bastille, gave a
Title:  letter to the commissary.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, unhappy woman!" cried the commissary.
Title:  
Title:  "How?  What do you say?  Of whom do you speak?  It is not of my
Title:  wife, I hope!"
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary, it is of her.  Yours is a pretty business."
Title:  
Title:  "But," said the agitated mercer, "do me the pleasure, monsieur,
Title:  to tell me how my own proper affair can become worse by anything
Title:  my wife does while I am in prison?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because that which she does is part of a plan concerted between
Title:  you--of an infernal plan."
Title:  
Title:  "I swear to you, Monsieur Commissary, that you are in the
Title:  profoundest error, that I know nothing in the world about what my
Title:  wife had to do, that I am entirely a stranger to what she has
Title:  done; and that if she has committed any follies, I renounce her,
Title:  I abjure her, I curse her!"
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!" said Athos to the commissary, "if you have no more need of
Title:  me, send me somewhere.  Your Monsieur Bonacieux is very
Title:  tiresome."
Title:  
Title:  The commissary designated by the same gesture Athos and
Title:  Bonacieux, "Let them be guarded more closely than ever."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet," said Athos, with his habitual calmness, "if it be
Title:  Monsieur d'Artagnan who is concerned in this matter, I do not
Title:  perceive how I can take his place."
Title:  
Title:  "Do as I bade you," cried the commissary, "and preserve absolute
Title:  secrecy.  You understand!"
Title:  
Title:  Athos shrugged his shoulders, and followed his guards silently,
Title:  while M. Bonacieux uttered lamentations enough to break the heart
Title:  of a tiger.
Title:  
Title:  They locked the mercer in the same dungeon where he had passed
Title:  the night, and left him to himself during the day.  Bonacieux
Title:  wept all day, like a true mercer, not being at all a military
Title:  man, as he himself informed us.  In the evening, about nine
Title:  o'clock, at the moment he had made up his mind to go to bed, he
Title:  heard steps in his corridor.  These steps drew near to his
Title:  dungeon, the door was thrown open, and the guards appeared.
Title:  
Title:  "Follow me," said an officer, who came up behind the guards.
Title:  
Title:  "Follow you!" cried Bonacieux, "follow you at this hour!  Where,
Title:  my God?"
Title:  
Title:  "Where we have orders to lead you."
Title:  
Title:  "But that is not an answer."
Title:  
Title:  "It is, nevertheless, the only one we can give."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my God, my God!" murmured the poor mercer, "now, indeed, I
Title:  am lost!"  And he followed the guards who came for him,
Title:  mechanically and without resistance.
Title:  
Title:  He passed along the same corridor as before, crossed one court,
Title:  then a second side of a building; at length, at the gate of the
Title:  entrance court he found a carriage surrounded by four guards on
Title:  horseback.  They made him enter this carriage, the officer placed
Title:  himself by his side, the door was locked, and they were left in a
Title:  rolling prison.  The carriage was put in motion as slowly as a
Title:  funeral car.  Through the closely fastened windows the prisoner
Title:  could perceive the houses and the pavement, that was all; but,
Title:  true Parisian as he was, Bonacieux could recognize every street
Title:  by the milestones, the signs, and the lamps.  At the moment of
Title:  arriving at St. Paul--the spot where such as were condemned at
Title:  the Bastille were executed--he was near fainting and crossed
Title:  himself twice.  He thought the carriage was about to stop there.
Title:  The carriage, however, passed on.
Title:  
Title:  Farther on, a still greater terror seized him on passing by the
Title:  cemetery of St. Jean, where state criminals were buried.  One
Title:  thing, however, reassured him; he remembered that before they
Title:  were buried their heads were generally cut off, and he felt that
Title:  his head was still on his shoulders.  But when he saw the
Title:  carriage take the way to La Greve, when he perceived the pointed
Title:  roof of the Hotel de Ville, and the carriage passed under the
Title:  arcade, he believed it was over with him.  He wished to confess
Title:  to the officer, and upon his refusal, uttered such pitiable cries
Title:  that the officer told him that if he continued to deafen him
Title:  thus, he should put a gag in his mouth.
Title:  
Title:  This measure somewhat reassured Bonacieux.  If they meant to
Title:  execute him at La Greve, it could scarcely be worth while to gag
Title:  him, as they had nearly reached the place of execution.  Indeed,
Title:  the carriage crossed the fatal spot without stopping.  There
Title:  remained, then, no other place to fear but the Traitor's Cross;
Title:  the carriage was taking the direct road to it.
Title:  
Title:  This time there was no longer any doubt; it was at the Traitor's
Title:  Cross that lesser criminals were executed.  Bonacieux had
Title:  flattered himself in believing himself worthy of St. Paul or of
Title:  the Place de Greve; it was at the Traitor's Cross that his
Title:  journey and his destiny were about to end!  He could not yet see
Title:  that dreadful cross, but he felt somehow as if it were coming to
Title:  meet him.  When he was within twenty paces of it, he heard a
Title:  noise of people and the carriage stopped.  This was more than
Title:  poor Bonacieux could endure, depressed as he was by the
Title:  successive emotions which he had experienced; he uttered a feeble
Title:  groan which night have been taken for the last sigh of a dying
Title:  man, and fainted.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  14  THE MAN OF MEUNG
Title:  
Title:  The crowd was caused, not by the expectation of a man to be
Title:  hanged, but by the contemplation of a man who was hanged.
Title:  
Title:  The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed its
Title:  way, passed through the crowd, threaded the Rue St. Honore,
Title:  turned into the Rue des Bons Enfants, and stopped before a low
Title:  door.
Title:  
Title:  The door opened; two guards received Bonacieux in their arms from
Title:  the officer who supported him.  They carried him through an
Title:  alley, up a flight of stairs, and deposited him in an
Title:  antechamber.
Title:  
Title:  All these movements had been effected mechanically, as far as he
Title:  was concerned.  He had walked as one walks in a dream; he had a
Title:  glimpse of objects as through a fog.  His ears had perceived
Title:  sounds without comprehending them; he might have been executed at
Title:  that moment without his making a single gesture in his own
Title:  defense or uttering a cry to implore mercy.
Title:  
Title:  He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the wall
Title:  and his hands hanging down, exactly on the spot where the guards
Title:  placed him.
Title:  
Title:  On looking around him, however, as he could perceive no
Title:  threatening object, as nothing indicated that he ran any real
Title:  danger, as the bench was comfortably covered with a well-stuffed
Title:  cushion, as the wall was ornamented with a beautiful Cordova
Title:  leather, and as large red damask curtains, fastened back by gold
Title:  clasps, floated before the window, he perceived by degrees that
Title:  his fear was exaggerated, and he began to turn his head to the
Title:  right and the left, upward and downward.
Title:  
Title:  At this movement, which nobody opposed, he resumed a little
Title:  courage, and ventured to draw up one leg and then the other.  At
Title:  length, with the help of his two hands he lifted himself from the
Title:  bench, and found himself on his feet.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door,
Title:  continued to exchange some words with a person in the next
Title:  chamber and then came up to the prisoner.  "Is your name
Title:  Bonacieux?" said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, Monsieur Officer," stammered the mercer, more dead than
Title:  alive, "at your service."
Title:  
Title:  "Come in," said the officer.
Title:  
Title:  And he moved out of the way to let the mercer pass.  The latter
Title:  obeyed without reply, and entered the chamber, where he appeared
Title:  to be expected.
Title:  
Title:  It was a large cabinet, close and stifling, with the walls
Title:  furnished with arms offensive and defensive, and in which there
Title:  was already a fire, although it was scarcely the end of the month
Title:  of September.  A square table, covered with books and papers,
Title:  upon which was unrolled an immense plan of the city of La
Title:  Rochelle, occupied the center of the room.
Title:  
Title:  Standing before the chimney was a man of middle height, of a
Title:  haughty, proud mien; with piercing eyes, a large brow, and a thin
Title:  face, which was made still longer by a ROYAL (or IMPERIAL, as it
Title:  is now called), surmounted by a pair of mustaches.  Although this
Title:  man was scarcely thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age, hair,
Title:  mustaches, and royal, all began to be gray.  This man, except a
Title:  sword, had all the appearance of a soldier; and his buff boots
Title:  still slightly covered with dust, indicated that he had been on
Title:  horseback in the course of the day.
Title:  
Title:  This man was Armand Jean Duplessis, Cardinal de Richelieu; not
Title:  such as he is now represented--broken down like an old man,
Title:  suffering like a martyr, his body bent, his voice failing, buried
Title:  in a large armchair as in an anticipated tomb; no longer living
Title:  but by the strength of his genius, and no longer maintaining the
Title:  struggle with Europe but by the eternal application of his
Title:  thoughts--but such as he really was at this period; that is to
Title:  say, an active and gallant cavalier, already weak of body, but
Title:  sustained by that moral power which made of him one of the most
Title:  extraordinary men that ever lived, preparing, after having
Title:  supported the Duc de Nevers in his duchy of Mantua, after having
Title:  taken Nimes, Castres, and Uzes, to drive the English from the
Title:  Isle of Re and lay siege to La Rochelle.
Title:  
Title:  At first sight, nothing denoted the cardinal; and it was
Title:  impossible for those who did not know his face to guess in whose
Title:  presence they were.
Title:  
Title:  The poor mercer remained standing at the door, while the eyes of
Title:  the personage we have just described were fixed upon him, and
Title:  appeared to wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past.
Title:  
Title:  "Is this that Bonacieux?" asked he, after a moment of silence.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur," replied the officer.
Title:  
Title:  "That's well.  Give me those papers, and leave us."
Title:  
Title:  The officer took from the table the papers pointed out, gave them
Title:  to him who asked for them, bowed to the ground, and retired.
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of the
Title:  Bastille.  From time to time the man by the chimney raised his
Title:  eyes from the writings, and plunged them like poniards into the
Title:  heart of the poor mercer.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of
Title:  examination, the cardinal was satisfied.
Title:  
Title:  "That head has never conspired," murmured he, "but it matters
Title:  not; we will see."
Title:  
Title:  "You are accused of high treason," said the cardinal, slowly.
Title:  
Title:  "So I have been told already, monseigneur," cried Bonacieux,
Title:  giving his interrogator the title he had heard the officer give
Title:  him, "but I swear to you that I know nothing about it."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal repressed a smile.
Title:  
Title:  "You have conspired with your wife, with Madame de Chevreuse, and
Title:  with my Lord Duke of Buckingham."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed, monseigneur," responded the mercer, "I have heard her
Title:  pronounce all those names."
Title:  
Title:  "And on what occasion?"
Title:  
Title:  "She said that the Cardinal de Richelieu had drawn the Duke of
Title:  Buckingham to Paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "She said that?" cried the cardinal, with violence.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur, but I told her she was wrong to talk about
Title:  such things; and that his Eminence was incapable--"
Title:  
Title:  "Hold your tongue!  You are stupid," replied the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "That's exactly what my wife said, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know who carried off your wife?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "You have suspicions, nevertheless?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur; but these suspicions appeared to be
Title:  disagreeable to Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer have
Title:  them."
Title:  
Title:  "Your wife has escaped.  Did you know that?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monseigneur.  I learned it since I have been in prison, and
Title:  that from the conversation of Monsieur the Commissary--an amiable
Title:  man."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal repressed another smile.
Title:  
Title:  "Then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since her
Title:  flight."
Title:  
Title:  "Absolutely, monseigneur; but she has most likely returned to the
Title:  Louvre."
Title:  
Title:  "At one o'clock this morning she had not returned."
Title:  
Title:  "My God!  What can have become of her, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "We shall know, be assured.  Nothing is concealed from the
Title:  cardinal; the cardinal knows everything."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case, monseigneur, do you believe the cardinal will be
Title:  so kind as to tell me what has become of my wife?"
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps he may; but you must, in the first place, reveal to the
Title:  cardinal all you know of your wife's relations with Madame de
Title:  Chevreuse."
Title:  
Title:  "But, monseigneur, I know nothing about them; I have never seen
Title:  her."
Title:  
Title:  "When you went to fetch your wife from the Louvre, did you always
Title:  return directly home?"
Title:  
Title:  "Scarcely ever; she had business to transact with linen drapers,
Title:  to whose houses I conducted her."
Title:  
Title:  "And how many were there of these linen drapers?"
Title:  
Title:  "Two, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "And where did they live?"
Title:  
Title:  "One in Rue de Vaugirard, the other Rue de la Harpe."
Title:  
Title:  "Did you go into these houses with her?"
Title:  
Title:  "Never, monseigneur; I waited at the door."
Title:  
Title:  "And what excuse did she give you for entering all alone?"
Title:  
Title:  "She gave me none; she told me to wait, and I waited."
Title:  
Title:  "You are a very complacent husband, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux,"
Title:  said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "He calls me his dear Monsieur," said the mercer to himself.
Title:  "PESTE!  Matters are going all right."
Title:  
Title:  "Should you know those doors again?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know the numbers?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "What are they?"
Title:  
Title:  "No. 25 in the Rue de Vaugirard; 75 in the Rue de la Harpe."
Title:  
Title:  "That's well," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  At these words he took up a silver bell, and rang it; the officer
Title:  entered.
Title:  
Title:  "Go," said he, in a subdued voice, "and find Rochefort.  Tell him
Title:  to come to me immediately, if he has returned."
Title:  
Title:  "The count is here," said the officer, "and requests to speak
Title:  with your Eminence instantly."
Title:  
Title:  "Let him come in, then!" said the cardinal, quickly.
Title:  
Title:  The officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity which
Title:  all the servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him.
Title:  
Title:  "To your Eminence!" murmured Bonacieux, rolling his eyes round in
Title:  astonishment.
Title:  
Title:  Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the
Title:  officer, when the door opened, and a new personage entered.
Title:  
Title:  "It is he!" cried Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "He!  What he?" asked the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "The man who abducted my wife."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal rang a second time.  The officer reappeared.
Title:  
Title:  "Place this man in the care of his guards again, and let him wait
Title:  till I send for him."
Title:  
Title:  "No, monseigneur, no, it is not he!" cried Bonacieux; "no, I was
Title:  deceived.  This is quite another man, and does not resemble him
Title:  at all.  Monsieur is, I am sure, an honest man."
Title:  
Title:  "Take away that fool!" said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  The officer took Bonacieux by the arm, and led him into the
Title:  antechamber, where he found his two guards.
Title:  
Title:  The newly introduced personage followed Bonacieux impatiently
Title:  with his eyes till he had gone out; and the moment the door
Title:  closed, "They have seen each other;" said he, approaching the
Title:  cardinal eagerly.
Title:  
Title:  "Who?" asked his Eminence.
Title:  
Title:  "He and she."
Title:  
Title:  "The queen and the duke?" cried Richelieu.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Where?"
Title:  
Title:  "At the Louvre."
Title:  
Title:  "Are you sure of it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Perfectly sure."
Title:  
Title:  "Who told you of it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Madame de Lannoy, who is devoted to your Eminence, as you know."
Title:  
Title:  "Why did she not let me know sooner?"
Title:  
Title:  "Whether by chance or mistrust, the queen made Madame de Surgis
Title:  sleep in her chamber, and detained her all day."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, we are beaten!  Now let us try to take our revenge."
Title:  
Title:  "I will assist you with all my heart, monseigneur; be assured of
Title:  that."
Title:  
Title:  "How did it come about?"
Title:  
Title:  "At half past twelve the queen was with her women--"
Title:  
Title:  "Where?"
Title:  
Title:  "In her bedchamber--"
Title:  
Title:  "Go on."
Title:  
Title:  "When someone came and brought her a handkerchief from her
Title:  laundress."
Title:  
Title:  "And then?"
Title:  
Title:  "The queen immediately exhibited strong emotion; and despite the
Title:  rouge with which her face was covered evidently turned pale--"
Title:  
Title:  "And then, and then?"
Title:  
Title:  "She then arose, and with altered voice, 'Ladies,' said she,
Title:  'wait for me ten minutes, I shall soon return.' She then opened
Title:  the door of her alcove, and went out."
Title:  
Title:  "Why did not Madame de Lannoy come and inform you instantly?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing was certain; besides, her Majesty had said, 'Ladies,
Title:  wait for me,' and she did not dare to disobey the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "How long did the queen remain out of the chamber?"
Title:  
Title:  "Three-quarters of an hour."
Title:  
Title:  "None of her women accompanied her?"
Title:  
Title:  "Only Donna Estafania."
Title:  
Title:  "Did she afterward return?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but only to take a little rosewood casket, with her cipher
Title:  upon it, and went out again immediately."
Title:  
Title:  "And when she finally returned, did she bring that casket with
Title:  her?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "Does Madame de Lannoy know what was in that casket?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; the diamond studs which his Majesty gave the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "And she came back without this casket?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame de Lannoy, then, is of opinion that she gave them to
Title:  Buckingham?"
Title:  
Title:  "She is sure of it."
Title:  
Title:  "How can she be so?"
Title:  
Title:  "In the course of the day Madame de Lannoy, in her quality of
Title:  tire-woman of the queen, looked for this casket, appeared uneasy
Title:  at not finding it, and at length asked information of the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "And then the queen?"
Title:  
Title:  "The queen became exceedingly red, and replied that having in the
Title:  evening broken one of those studs, she had sent it to her
Title:  goldsmith to be repaired."
Title:  
Title:  "He must be called upon, and so ascertain if the thing be true or
Title:  not."
Title:  
Title:  "I have just been with him."
Title:  
Title:  "And the goldsmith?"
Title:  
Title:  "The goldsmith has heard nothing of it."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, well!  Rochefort, all is not lost; and perhaps--perhaps
Title:  everything is for the best."
Title:  
Title:  "The fact is that I do not doubt your Eminence's genius--"
Title:  
Title:  "Will repair the blunders of his agent--is that it?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is exactly what I was going to say, if your Eminence had
Title:  let me finish my sentence."
Title:  
Title:  "Meanwhile, do you know where the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the
Title:  Duke of Buckingham are now concealed?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monseigneur; my people could tell me nothing on that head."
Title:  
Title:  "But I know."
Title:  
Title:  "You, monseigneur?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; or at least I guess.  They were, one in the Rue de
Title:  Vaugirard, No. 25; the other in the Rue de la Harpe, No. 75."
Title:  
Title:  "Does your Eminence command that they both be instantly
Title:  arrested?"
Title:  
Title:  "It will be too late; they will be gone."
Title:  
Title:  "But still, we can make sure that they are so."
Title:  
Title:  "Take ten men of my Guardsmen, and search the two houses
Title:  thoroughly."
Title:  
Title:  "Instantly, monseigneur."  And Rochefort went hastily out of the
Title:  apartment.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal being left alone, reflected for an instant and then
Title:  rang the bell a third time.  The same officer appeared.
Title:  
Title:  "Bring the prisoner in again," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  M. Bonacieux was introduced afresh, and upon a sign from the
Title:  cardinal, the officer retired.
Title:  
Title:  "You have deceived me!" said the cardinal, sternly.
Title:  
Title:  "I," cried Bonacieux, "I deceive your Eminence!"
Title:  
Title:  "Your wife, in going to Rue de Vaugirard and Rue de la Harpe, did
Title:  not go to find linen drapers."
Title:  
Title:  "Then why did she go, just God?"
Title:  
Title:  "She went to meet the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of Buckingham."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," cried Bonacieux, recalling all his remembrances of the
Title:  circumstances, "yes, that's it.  Your Eminence is right.  I told
Title:  my wife several times that it was surprising that linen drapers
Title:  should live in such houses as those, in houses that had no signs;
Title:  but she always laughed at me.  Ah, monseigneur!" continued
Title:  Bonacieux, throwing himself at his Eminence's feet, "ah, how
Title:  truly you are the cardinal, the great cardinal, the man of genius
Title:  whom all the world reveres!"
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal, however contemptible might be the triumph gained
Title:  over so vulgar a being as Bonacieux, did not the less enjoy it
Title:  for an instant; then, almost immediately, as if a fresh thought
Title:  has occurred, a smile played upon his lips, and he said, offering
Title:  his hand to the mercer, "Rise, my friend, you are a worthy man."
Title:  
Title:  "The cardinal has touched me with his hand!  I have touched the
Title:  hand of the great man!" cried Bonacieux.  "The great man has
Title:  called me his friend!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, my friend, yes," said the cardinal, with that paternal tone
Title:  which he sometimes knew how to assume, but which deceived none
Title:  who knew him; "and as you have been unjustly suspected, well, you
Title:  must be indemnified.  Here, take this purse of a hundred
Title:  pistoles, and pardon me."
Title:  
Title:  "I pardon you, monseigneur!" said Bonacieux, hesitating to take
Title:  the purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but a
Title:  pleasantry.  "But you are able to have me arrested, you are able
Title:  to have me tortured, you are able to have me hanged; you are the
Title:  master, and I could not have the least word to say.  Pardon you,
Title:  monseigneur!  You cannot mean that!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, you are generous in this matter.
Title:  I see it and I thank you for it.  Thus, then, you will take this
Title:  bag, and you will go away without being too malcontent."
Title:  
Title:  "I go away enchanted."
Title:  
Title:  "Farewell, then, or rather, AU REVOIR!"
Title:  
Title:  And the cardinal made him a sign with his hand, to which
Title:  Bonacieux replied by bowing to the ground.  He then went out
Title:  backward, and when he was in the antechamber the cardinal heard
Title:  him, in his enthusiasm, crying aloud, "Long life to the
Title:  Monseigneur!  Long life to his Eminence!  Long life to the great
Title:  cardinal!"  The cardinal listened with a smile to this vociferous
Title:  manifestation of the feelings of M. Bonacieux; and then, when
Title:  Bonacieux's cries were no longer audible, "Good!" said he, "that
Title:  man would henceforward lay down his life for me."  And the
Title:  cardinal began to examine with the greatest attention the map of
Title:  La Rochelle, which, as we have said, lay open on the desk,
Title:  tracing with a pencil the line in which the famous dyke was to
Title:  pass which, eighteen months later, shut up the port of the
Title:  besieged city.  As he was in the deepest of his strategic
Title:  meditations, the door opened, and Rochefort returned.
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" said the cardinal, eagerly, rising with a promptitude
Title:  which proved the degree of importance he attached to the
Title:  commission with which he had charged the count.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said the latter, "a young woman of about twenty-six or
Title:  twenty-eight years of age, and a man of from thirty-five to
Title:  forty, have indeed lodged at the two houses pointed out by your
Title:  Eminence; but the woman left last night, and the man this
Title:  morning."
Title:  
Title:  "It was they!" cried the cardinal, looking at the clock; "and now
Title:  it is too late to have them pursued.  The duchess is at Tours,
Title:  and the duke at Boulogne.  It is in London they must be found."
Title:  
Title:  "What are your Eminence's orders?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not a word of what has passed.  Let the queen remain in perfect
Title:  security; let her be ignorant that we know her secret.  Let her
Title:  believe that we are in search of some conspiracy or other.  Send
Title:  me the keeper of the seals, Seguier."
Title:  
Title:  "And that man, what has your Eminence done with him?"
Title:  
Title:  "What man?" asked the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "That Bonacieux."
Title:  
Title:  "I have done with him all that could be done.  I have made him a
Title:  spy upon his wife."
Title:  
Title:  The Comte de Rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges the
Title:  superiority of the master as great, and retired.
Title:  
Title:  Left alone, the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter,
Title:  which he secured with his special seal.  Then he rang.  The
Title:  officer entered for the fourth time.
Title:  
Title:  "Tell Vitray to come to me," said he, "and tell him to get ready
Title:  for a journey."
Title:  
Title:  An instant after, the man he asked for was before him, booted and
Title:  spurred.
Title:  
Title:  "Vitray," said he, "you will go with all speed to London.  You
Title:  must not stop an instant on the way.  You will deliver this
Title:  letter to Milady.  Here is an order for two hundred pistoles;
Title:  call upon my treasurer and get the money.  You shall have as much
Title:  again if you are back within six days, and have executed your
Title:  commission well."
Title:  
Title:  The messenger, without replying a single word, bowed, took the
Title:  letter, with the order for the two hundred pistoles, and retired.
Title:  
Title:  Here is what the letter contained:
Title:  
Title:  MILADY, Be at the first ball at which the Duke of Buckingham
Title:  shall be present.  He will wear on his doublet twelve diamond
Title:  studs; get as near to him as you can, and cut off two.
Title:  
Title:  As soon as these studs shall be in your possession, inform me.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  15 MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD
Title:  
Title:  On the day after these events had taken place, Athos not having
Title:  reappeared, M. de Treville was informed by d'Artagnan and Porthos
Title:  of the circumstance.  As to Aramis, he had asked for leave of
Title:  absence for five days, and was gone, it was said, to Rouen on
Title:  family business.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville was the father of his soldiers.  The lowest or the
Title:  least known of them, as soon as he assumed the uniform of the
Title:  company, was as sure of his aid and support as if he had been his
Title:  own brother.
Title:  
Title:  He repaired, then, instantly to the office of the LIEUTENANT-
Title:  CRIMINEL.  The officer who commanded the post of the
Title:  Red Cross was sent for, and by successive inquiries they learned
Title:  that Athos was then lodged in the Fort l'Eveque.
Title:  
Title:  Athos had passed through all the examinations we have seen
Title:  Bonacieux undergo.
Title:  
Title:  We were present at the scene in which the two captives were
Title:  confronted with each other.  Athos, who had till that time said
Title:  nothing for fear that d'Artagnan, interrupted in his turn, should
Title:  not have the time necessary, from this moment declared that his
Title:  name was Athos, and not d'Artagnan.  He added that he did not
Title:  know either M. or Mme. Bonacieux; that he had never spoken to the
Title:  one or the other; that he had come, at about ten o'clock in the
Title:  evening, to pay a visit to his friend M. d'Artagnan, but that
Title:  till that hour he had been at M. de Treville's, where he had
Title:  dined.  "Twenty witnesses," added he, "could attest the fact";
Title:  and he named several distinguished gentlemen, and among them was
Title:  M. le Duc de la Tremouille.
Title:  
Title:  The second commissary was as much bewildered as the first had
Title:  been by the simple and firm declaration of the Musketeer, upon
Title:  whom he was anxious to take the revenge which men of the robe
Title:  like at all times to gain over men of the sword; but the name of
Title:  M. de Treville, and that of M. de la Tremouille, commanded a
Title:  little reflection.
Title:  
Title:  Athos was then sent to the cardinal; but unfortunately the
Title:  cardinal was at the Louvre with the king.
Title:  
Title:  It was precisely at this moment that M. de Treville, on leaving
Title:  the residence of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL and the governor of the
Title:  Fort l'Eveque without being able to find Athos, arrived at the
Title:  palace.
Title:  
Title:  As captain of the Musketeers, M. de Treville had the right of
Title:  entry at all times.
Title:  
Title:  It is well known how violent the king's prejudices were against
Title:  the queen, and how carefully these prejudices were kept up by the
Title:  cardinal, who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitely
Title:  more than men.  One of the grand causes of this prejudice was the
Title:  friendship of Anne of Austria for Mme. de Chevreuse.  These two
Title:  women gave him more uneasiness than the war with Spain, the
Title:  quarrel with England, or the embarrassment of the finances.  In
Title:  his eyes and to his conviction, Mme. de Chevreuse not only served
Title:  the queen in her political intrigues, but, what tormented him
Title:  still more, in her amorous intrigues.
Title:  
Title:  At the first word the cardinal spoke of Mme. de Chevreuse--who,
Title:  though exiled to Tours and believed to be in that city, had come
Title:  to Paris, remained there five days, and outwitted the police--the
Title:  king flew into a furious passion.  Capricious and unfaithful, the
Title:  king wished to be called Louis the Just and Louis the Chaste.
Title:  Posterity will find a difficulty in understanding this character,
Title:  which history explains only by facts and never by reason.
Title:  
Title:  But when the cardinal added that not only Mme. de Chevreuse had
Title:  been in Paris, but still further, that the queen had renewed with
Title:  her one of those mysterious correspondences which at that time
Title:  was named a CABAL; when he affirmed that he, the cardinal, was
Title:  about to unravel the most closely twisted thread of this
Title:  intrigue; that at the moment of arresting in the very act, with
Title:  all the proofs about her, the queen's emissary to the exiled
Title:  duchess, a Musketeer had dared to interrupt the course of justice
Title:  violently, by falling sword in hand upon the honest men of the
Title:  law, charged with investigating impartially the whole affair in
Title:  order to place it before the eyes of the king--Louis XIII could
Title:  not contain himself, and he made a step toward the queen's
Title:  apartment with that pale and mute indignation which, when in
Title:  broke out, led this prince to the commission of the most pitiless
Title:  cruelty.  And yet, in all this, the cardinal had not yet said a
Title:  word about the Duke of Buckingham.
Title:  
Title:  At this instant M. de Treville entered, cool, polite, and in
Title:  irreproachable costume.
Title:  
Title:  Informed of what had passed by the presence of the cardinal and
Title:  the alteration in the king's countenance, M. de Treville felt
Title:  himself something like Samson before the Philistines.
Title:  
Title:  Louis XIII had already placed his hand on the knob of the door;
Title:  at the noise of M. de Treville's entrance he turned round.  "You
Title:  arrive in good time, monsieur," said the king, who, when his
Title:  passions were raised to a certain point, could not dissemble; "I
Title:  have learned some fine things concerning your Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  "And I," said Treville, coldly, "I have some pretty things
Title:  to tell your Majesty concerning these gownsmen."
Title:  
Title:  "What?" said the king, with hauteur.
Title:  
Title:  "I have the honor to inform your Majesty," continued M. de
Title:  Treville, in the same tone, "that a party of PROCUREURS,
Title:  commissaries, and men of the police--very estimable people, but
Title:  very inveterate, as it appears, against the uniform--have taken
Title:  upon themselves to arrest in a house, to lead away through the
Title:  open street, and throw into the Fort l'Eveque, all upon an order
Title:  which they have refused to show me, one of my, or rather your
Title:  Musketeers, sire, of irreproachable conduct, of an almost
Title:  illustrious reputation, and whom your Majesty knows favorably,
Title:  Monsieur Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "Athos," said the king, mechanically; "yes, certainly I know that
Title:  name."
Title:  
Title:  "Let your Majesty remember," said Treville, "that Monsieur Athos
Title:  is the Musketeer who, in the annoying duel which you are
Title:  acquainted with, had the misfortune to wound Monsieur de Cahusac
Title:  so seriously.  A PROPOS, monseigneur," continued Treville.
Title:  Addressing the cardinal, "Monsieur de Cahusac is quite recovered,
Title:  is he not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Thank you," said the cardinal, biting his lips with anger.
Title:  
Title:  "Athos, then, went to pay a visit to one of his friends absent at
Title:  the time," continued Treville, "to a young Bearnais, a cadet in
Title:  his Majesty's Guards, the company of Monsieur Dessessart, but
Title:  scarcely had he arrived at his friend's and taken up a book,
Title:  while waiting his return, when a mixed crowd of bailiffs and
Title:  soldiers came and laid siege to the house, broke open several
Title:  doors--"
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal made the king a sign, which signified, "That was on
Title:  account of the affair about which I spoke to you."
Title:  
Title:  "We all know that," interrupted the king; "for all that was done
Title:  for our service."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said Treville, "it was also for your Majesty's service
Title:  that one of my Musketeers, who was innocent, has been seized,
Title:  that he has been placed between two guards like a malefactor, and
Title:  that this gallant man, who has ten times shed his blood in your
Title:  Majesty's service and is ready to shed it again, has been paraded
Title:  through the midst of an insolent populace?"
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!" said the king, who began to be shaken, "was it so
Title:  managed?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur de Treville," said the cardinal, with the greatest
Title:  phlegm, "does not tell your Majesty that this innocent Musketeer,
Title:  this gallant man, had only an hour before attacked, sword in
Title:  hand, four commissaries of inquiry, who were delegated by myself
Title:  to examine into an affair of the highest importance."
Title:  
Title:  "I defy your Eminence to prove it," cried Treville, with his
Title:  Gascon freedom and military frankness; "for one hour before,
Title:  Monsieur Athos, who, I will confide it to your Majesty, is really
Title:  a man of the highest quality, did me the honor after having dined
Title:  with me to be conversing in the saloon of my hotel, with the Duc
Title:  de la Tremouille and the Comte de Chalus, who happened to be
Title:  there."
Title:  
Title:  The king looked at the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "A written examination attests it," said the cardinal, replying
Title:  aloud to the mute interrogation of his Majesty; "and the ill-
Title:  treated people have drawn up the following, which I have the
Title:  honor to present to your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "And is the written report of the gownsmen to be placed in
Title:  comparison with the word of honor of a swordsman?" replied
Title:  Treville haughtily.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, come, Treville, hold your tongue," said the king.
Title:  
Title:  "If his Eminence entertains any suspicion against one of my
Title:  Musketeers," said Treville, "the justice of Monsieur the Cardinal
Title:  is so well known that I demand an inquiry."
Title:  
Title:  "In the house in which the judicial inquiry was made," continued
Title:  the impassive cardinal, "there lodges, I believe, a young
Title:  Bearnais, a friend of the Musketeer."
Title:  
Title:  "Your Eminence means Monsieur d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "I mean a young man whom you patronize, Monsieur de Treville."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, your Eminence, it is the same."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you not suspect this young man of having given bad counsel?"
Title:  
Title:  "To Athos, to a man double his age?" interrupted Treville.  "No,
Title:  monseigneur.  Besides, d'Artagnan passed the evening with me."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said the cardinal, "everybody seems to have passed the
Title:  evening with you."
Title:  
Title:  "Does your Eminence doubt my word?" said Treville, with a brow
Title:  flushed with anger.
Title:  
Title:  "No, God forbid," said the cardinal; "only, at what hour was he with you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, as to that I can speak positively, your Eminence; for as he
Title:  came in I remarked that it was but half past nine by the clock,
Title:  although I had believed it to be later."
Title:  
Title:  "At what hour did he leave your hotel?"
Title:  
Title:  "At half past ten--an hour after the event."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," replied the cardinal, who could not for an instant
Title:  suspect the loyalty of Treville, and who felt that the victory
Title:  was escaping him, "well, but Athos WAS taken in the house in the
Title:  Rue des Fossoyeurs."
Title:  
Title:  "Is one friend forbidden to visit another, or a Musketeer of my
Title:  company to fraternize with a Guard of Dessessart's company?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, when the house where he fraternizes is suspected."
Title:  
Title:  "That house is suspected, Treville," said the king; "perhaps you
Title:  did not know it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed, sire, I did not.  The house may be suspected; but I deny
Title:  that it is so in the part of it inhabited my Monsieur d'Artagnan,
Title:  for I can affirm, sire, if I can believe what he says, that there
Title:  does not exist a more devoted servant of your Majesty, or a more
Title:  profound admirer of Monsieur the Cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Was it not this d'Artagnan who wounded Jussac one day, in that
Title:  unfortunate encounter which took place near the Convent of the
Title:  Carmes-Dechausses?" asked the king, looking at the cardinal, who
Title:  colored with vexation.
Title:  
Title:  "And the next day, Bernajoux. Yes, sire, yes, it is the same; and
Title:  your Majesty has a good memory."
Title:  
Title:  "Come, how shall we decide?" said the king.
Title:  
Title:  "That concerns your Majesty more than me," said the cardinal.  "I
Title:  should affirm the culpability."
Title:  
Title:  "And I deny it," said Treville.  "But his Majesty has judges, and
Title:  these judges will decide."
Title:  
Title:  "That is best," said the king.  "Send the case before the judges;
Title:  it is their business to judge, and they shall judge."
Title:  
Title:  "Only," replied Treville, "it is a sad thing that in the
Title:  unfortunate times in which we live, the purest life, the most
Title:  incontestable virtue, cannot exempt a man from infamy and
Title:  persecution.  The army, I will answer for it, will be but little
Title:  pleased at being exposed to rigorous treatment on account of
Title:  police affairs."
Title:  
Title:  The expression was imprudent; but M. de Treville launched it with
Title:  knowledge of his cause.  He was desirous of an explosion, because
Title:  in that case the mine throws forth fire, and fire enlightens.
Title:  
Title:  "Police affairs!" cried the king, taking up Treville's words,
Title:  "police affairs!  And what do you know about them, Monsieur?
Title:  Meddle with your Musketeers, and do not annoy me in this way.  It
Title:  appears, according to your account, that if by mischance a
Title:  Musketeer is arrested, France is in danger.  What a noise about a
Title:  Musketeer!  I would arrest ten of them, VENTREBLEU, a hundred,
Title:  even, all the company, and I would not allow a whisper."
Title:  
Title:  "From the moment they are suspected by your Majesty," said
Title:  Treville, "the Musketeers are guilty; therefore, you see me
Title:  prepared to surrender my sword--for after having accused my
Title:  soldiers, there can be no doubt that Monsieur the Cardinal will
Title:  end by accusing me.  It is best to constitute myself at once a
Title:  prisoner with Athos, who is already arrested, and with
Title:  d'Artagnan, who most probably will be."
Title:  
Title:  "Gascon-headed man, will you have done?" said the king.
Title:  
Title:  "Sire," replied Treville, without lowering his voice in the
Title:  least, "either order my Musketeer to be restored to me, or let
Title:  him be tried."
Title:  
Title:  "He shall be tried," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, so much the better; for in that case I shall demand of his
Title:  Majesty permission to plead for him."
Title:  
Title:  The king feared an outbreak.
Title:  
Title:  "If his Eminence," said he, "did not have personal motives--"
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal saw what the king was about to say and interrupted
Title:  him:
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon me," said he; "but the instant your Majesty considers me
Title:  a prejudiced judge, I withdraw."
Title:  
Title:  "Come," said the king, "will you swear, by my father, that Athos
Title:  was at your residence during the event and that he took no part
Title:  in it?"
Title:  
Title:  "By your glorious father, and by yourself, whom I love and
Title:  venerate above all the world, I swear it."
Title:  
Title:  "Be so kind as to reflect, sire," said the cardinal.  "If we
Title:  release the prisoner thus, we shall never know the truth."
Title:  
Title:  "Athos may always be found," replied Treville, "ready to answer,
Title:  when it shall please the gownsmen to interrogate him.  He will
Title:  not desert, Monsieur the Cardinal, be assured of that; I will
Title:  answer for him."
Title:  
Title:  "No, he will not desert," said the king; "he can always be found,
Title:  as Treville says.  Besides," added he, lowering his voice and
Title:  looking with a suppliant air at the cardinal, "let us give them
Title:  apparent security; that is policy."
Title:  
Title:  This policy of Louis XIII made Richelieu smile.
Title:  
Title:  "Order it as you please, sire; you possess the right of pardon."
Title:  
Title:  "The right of pardoning only applies to the guilty," said
Title:  Treville, who was determined to have the last word, "and my
Title:  Musketeer is innocent.  It is not mercy, then, that you are about
Title:  to accord, sire, it is justice."
Title:  
Title:  "And he is in the Fort l'Eveque?" said the king.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire, in solitary confinement, in a dungeon, like the
Title:  lowest criminal."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" murmured the king; "what must be done?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sign an order for his release, and all will be said," replied
Title:  the cardinal.  "I believe with your Majesty that Monsieur de
Title:  Treville's guarantee is more than sufficient."
Title:  
Title:  Treville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixed
Title:  with fear; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on the
Title:  part of the cardinal to this sudden yielding.
Title:  
Title:  The king signed the order for release, and Treville carried it
Title:  away without delay.  As he was about to leave the presence, the
Title:  cardinal gave him a friendly smile, and said, "A perfect harmony
Title:  reigns, sire, between the leaders and the soldiers of your
Title:  Musketeers, which must be profitable for the service and
Title:  honorable to all."
Title:  
Title:  "He will play me some dog's trick or other, and that
Title:  immediately," said Treville.  "One has never the last word with
Title:  such a man.  But let us be quick--the king may change his mind in
Title:  an hour; and at all events it is more difficult to replace a man
Title:  in the Fort l'Eveque or the Bastille who has got out, than to
Title:  keep a prisoner there who is in."
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville made his entrance triumphantly into the Fort
Title:  l'Eveque, whence he delivered the Musketeer, whose peaceful
Title:  indifference had not for a moment abandoned him.
Title:  
Title:  The first time he saw d'Artagnan, "You have come off well," said
Title:  he to him; "there is your Jussac thrust paid for.  There still
Title:  remains that of Bernajoux, but you must not be too confident."
Title:  
Title:  As to the rest, M. de Treville had good reason to mistrust the
Title:  cardinal and to think that all was not over, for scarcely had the
Title:  captain of the Musketeers closed the door after him, than his
Title:  Eminence said to the king, "Now that we are at length by
Title:  ourselves, we will, if your Majesty pleases, converse seriously.
Title:  Sire, Buckingham has been in Paris five days, and only left this
Title:  morning."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  16  IN WHICH M. SEGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THAN
Title:  ONCE FOR THE BELL, IN ORDER TO RING IT, AS HE DID BEFORE
Title:  
Title:  It is impossible to form an idea of the impression these few
Title:  words made upon Louis XIII.  He grew pale and red alternately;
Title:  and the cardinal saw at once that he had recovered by a single
Title:  blow all the ground he had lost.
Title:  
Title:  "Buckingham in Paris!" cried he, "and why does he come?"
Title:  
Title:  "To conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the Huguenots and the
Title:  Spaniards."
Title:  
Title:  "No, PARDIEU, no!  To conspire against my honor with Madame de
Title:  Chevreuse, Madame de Longueville, and the Condes."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, sire, what an idea!  The queen is too virtuous; and besides,
Title:  loves your Majesty too well."
Title:  
Title:  "Woman is weak, Monsieur Cardinal," said the king; "and as to
Title:  loving me much, I have my own opinion as to that love."
Title:  
Title:  "I not the less maintain," said the cardinal, "that the Duke of
Title:  Buckingham came to Paris for a project wholly political."
Title:  
Title:  "And I am sure that he came for quite another purpose, Monsieur
Title:  Cardinal; but if the queen be guilty, let her tremble!"
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed," said the cardinal, "whatever repugnance I may have to
Title:  directing my mind to such a treason, your Majesty compels me to
Title:  think of it.  Madame de Lannoy, whom, according to your Majesty's
Title:  command, I have frequently interrogated, told me this morning
Title:  that the night before last her Majesty sat up very late, that
Title:  this morning she wept much, and that she was writing all day."
Title:  
Title:  "That's it!" cried the king; "to him, no doubt.  Cardinal, I must
Title:  have the queen's papers."
Title:  
Title:  "But how to take them, sire?  It seems to me that it is neither
Title:  your Majesty nor myself who can charge himself with such a
Title:  mission."
Title:  
Title:  "How did they act with regard to the Marechale d'Ancre?" cried
Title:  the king, in the highest state of choler; "first her closets were
Title:  thoroughly searched, and then she herself."
Title:  
Title:  "The Marechale d'Ancre was no more than the Marechale d'Ancre. A
Title:  Florentine adventurer, sire, and that was all; while the august
Title:  spouse of your Majesty is Anne of Austria, Queen of France--that
Title:  is to say, one of the greatest princesses in the world."
Title:  
Title:  "She is not the less guilty, Monsieur Duke!  The more she has
Title:  forgotten the high position in which she was placed, the more
Title:  degrading is her fall.  Besides, I long ago determined to put an
Title:  end to all these petty intrigues of policy and love.  She has
Title:  near her a certain Laporte."
Title:  
Title:  "Who, I believe, is the mainspring of all this, I confess," said
Title:  the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "You think then, as I do, that she deceives me?" said the king.
Title:  
Title:  "I believe, and I repeat it to your Majesty, that the queen
Title:  conspires against the power of the king, but I have not said
Title:  against his honor."
Title:  
Title:  "And I--I tell you against both.  I tell you the queen does not
Title:  love me; I tell you she loves another; I tell you she loves that
Title:  infamous Buckingham!  Why did you not have him arrested while in
Title:  Paris?"
Title:  
Title:  "Arrest the Duke!  Arrest the prime minister of King Charles I!
Title:  Think of it, sire!  What a scandal!  And if the suspicions of
Title:  your Majesty, which I still continue to doubt, should prove to
Title:  have any foundation, what a terrible disclosure, what a fearful
Title:  scandal!"
Title:  
Title:  "But as he exposed himself like a vagabond or a thief, he should
Title:  have been--"
Title:  
Title:  Louis XIII stopped, terrified at what he was about to say, while
Title:  Richelieu, stretching out his neck, waited uselessly for the word
Title:  which had died on the lips of the king.
Title:  
Title:  "He should have been--?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing," said the king, "nothing.  But all the time he was in
Title:  Paris, you, of course, did not lose sight of him?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "Where did he lodge?"
Title:  
Title:  "Rue de la Harpe. No. 75."
Title:  
Title:  "Where is that?"
Title:  
Title:  "By the side of the Luxembourg."
Title:  
Title:  "And you are certain that the queen and he did not see each
Title:  other?"
Title:  
Title:  "I believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "But they have corresponded; it is to him that the queen has been
Title:  writing all the day.  Monsieur Duke, I must have those letters!"
Title:  
Title:  "Sire, notwithstanding--"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Duke, at whatever price it may be, I will have them."
Title:  
Title:  "I would, however, beg your Majesty to observe--"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you, then, also join in betraying me, Monsieur Cardinal, by
Title:  thus always opposing my will?  Are you also in accord with Spain
Title:  and England, with Madame de Chevreuse and the queen?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sire," replied the cardinal, sighing, "I believed myself secure
Title:  from such a suspicion."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Cardinal, you have heard me; I will have those
Title:  letters."
Title:  
Title:  "There is but one way."
Title:  
Title:  "What is that?"
Title:  
Title:  "That would be to charge Monsieur de Seguier, the keeper of the
Title:  seals, with this mission.  The matter enters completely into the
Title:  duties of the post."
Title:  
Title:  "Let him be sent for instantly."
Title:  
Title:  "He is most likely at my hotel.  I requested him to call, and
Title:  when I came to the Louvre I left orders if he came, to desire him
Title:  to wait."
Title:  
Title:  "Let him be sent for instantly."
Title:  
Title:  "Your Majesty's orders shall be executed; but--"
Title:  
Title:  "But what?"
Title:  
Title:  "But the queen will perhaps refuse to obey."
Title:  
Title:  "My orders?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, if she is ignorant that these orders come from the king."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, that she may have no doubt on that head, I will go and
Title:  inform her myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Your Majesty will not forget that I have done everything in my
Title:  power to prevent a rupture."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, Duke, yes, I know you are very indulgent toward the queen,
Title:  too indulgent, perhaps; we shall have occasion, I warn you, at
Title:  some future period to speak of that."
Title:  
Title:  "Whenever it shall please your Majesty; but I shall be always
Title:  happy and proud, sire, to sacrifice myself to the harmony which I
Title:  desire to see reign between you and the Queen of France."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well, Cardinal, very well; but, meantime, send for Monsieur
Title:  the Keeper of the Seals.  I will go to the queen."
Title:  
Title:  And Louis XIII, opening the door of communication, passed into
Title:  the corridor which led from his apartments to those of Anne of
Title:  Austria.
Title:  
Title:  The queen was in the midst of her women--Mme. de Guitaut, Mme. de
Title:  Sable, Mme. de Montbazon, and Mme. de Guemene.  In a corner was
Title:  the Spanish companion, Donna Estafania, who had followed her from
Title:  Madrid.  Mme. Guemene was reading aloud, and everybody was
Title:  listening to her with attention with the exception of the queen,
Title:  who had, on the contrary, desired this reading in order that she
Title:  might be able, while feigning to listen, to pursue the thread of
Title:  her own thoughts.
Title:  
Title:  These thoughts, gilded as they were by a last reflection of love,
Title:  were not the less sad.  Anne of Austria, deprived of the
Title:  confidence of her husband, pursued by the hatred of the cardinal,
Title:  who could not pardon her for having repulsed a more tender
Title:  feeling, having before her eyes the example of the queen-mother
Title:  whom that hatred had tormented all her life--though Marie de
Title:  Medicis, if the memoirs of the time are to be believed, had begun
Title:  by according to the cardinal that sentiment which Anne of Austria
Title:  always refused him--Anne of Austria had seen her most devoted
Title:  servants fall around her, her most intimate confidants, her
Title:  dearest favorites.  Like those unfortunate persons endowed with a
Title:  fatal gift, she brought misfortune upon everything she touched.
Title:  Her friendship was a fatal sign which called down persecution.
Title:  Mme. de Chevreuse and Mme. de Bernet were exiled, and Laporte did
Title:  not conceal from his mistress that he expected to be arrested
Title:  every instant.
Title:  
Title:  It was at the moment when she was plunged in the deepest and
Title:  darkest of these reflections that the door of the chamber opened,
Title:  and the king entered.
Title:  
Title:  The reader hushed herself instantly.  All the ladies rose, and
Title:  there was a profound silence.  As to the king, he made no
Title:  demonstration of politeness, only stopping before the queen.
Title:  "Madame," said he, "you are about to receive a visit from the
Title:  chancellor, who will communicate certain matters to you with
Title:  which I have charged him."
Title:  
Title:  The unfortunate queen, who was constantly threatened with
Title:  divorce, exile, and trial even, turned pale under her rouge, and
Title:  could not refrain from saying, "But why this visit, sire?  What
Title:  can the chancellor have to say to me that your Majesty could not
Title:  say yourself?"
Title:  
Title:  The king turned upon his heel without reply, and almost at the
Title:  same instant the captain of the Guards, M. de Guitant, announced
Title:  the visit of the chancellor.
Title:  
Title:  When the chancellor appeared, the king had already gone out by
Title:  another door.
Title:  
Title:  The chancellor entered, half smiling, half blushing.  As we shall
Title:  probably meet with him again in the course of our history, it may
Title:  be well for our readers to be made at once acquainted with him.
Title:  
Title:  This chancellor was a pleasant man.  He was Des Roches le Masle,
Title:  canon of Notre Dame, who had formerly been valet of a bishop, who
Title:  introduced him to his Eminence as a perfectly devout man.  The
Title:  cardinal trusted him, and therein found his advantage.
Title:  
Title:  There are many stories related of him, and among them this.
Title:  After a wild youth, he had retired into a convent, there to
Title:  expiate, at least for some time, the follies of adolescence.  On
Title:  entering this holy place, the poor penitent was unable to shut
Title:  the door so close as to prevent the passions he fled from
Title:  entering with him.  He was incessantly attacked by them, and the
Title:  superior, to whom he had confided this misfortune, wishing as
Title:  much as in him lay to free him from them, had advised him, in
Title:  order to conjure away the tempting demon, to have recourse to the
Title:  bell rope, and ring with all his might.  At the denunciating
Title:  sound, the monks would be rendered aware that temptation was
Title:  besieging a brother, and all the community would go to prayers.
Title:  
Title:  This advice appeared good to the future chancellor.  He conjured
Title:  the evil spirit with abundance of prayers offered up by the
Title:  monks.  But the devil does not suffer himself to be easily
Title:  dispossessed from a place in which he has fixed his garrison.  In
Title:  proportion as they redoubled the exorcisms he redoubled the
Title:  temptations; so that day and night the bell was ringing full
Title:  swing, announcing the extreme desire for mortification which the
Title:  penitent experienced.
Title:  
Title:  The monks had no longer an instant of repose.  By day they did
Title:  nothing but ascend and descend the steps which led to the chapel;
Title:  at night, in addition to complines and matins, they were further
Title:  obliged to leap twenty times out of their beds and prostrate
Title:  themselves on the floor of their cells.
Title:  
Title:  It is not known whether it was the devil who gave way, or the
Title:  monks who grew tired; but within three months the penitent
Title:  reappeared in the world with the reputation of being the most
Title:  terrible POSSESSED that ever existed.
Title:  
Title:  On leaving the convent he entered into the magistracy, became
Title:  president on the place of his uncle, embraced the cardinal's
Title:  party, which did not prove want of sagacity, became chancellor,
Title:  served his Eminence with zeal in his hatred against the queen-
Title:  mother and his vengeance against Anne of Austria, stimulated the
Title:  judges in the affair of Calais, encouraged the attempts of M. de
Title:  Laffemas, chief gamekeeper of France; then, at length, invested
Title:  with the entire confidence of the cardinal--a confidence which he
Title:  had so well earned--he received the singular commission for the
Title:  execution of which he presented himself in the queen's
Title:  apartments.
Title:  
Title:  The queen was still standing when he entered; but scarcely had
Title:  she perceived him then she reseated herself in her armchair, and
Title:  made a sign to her women to resume their cushions and stools, and
Title:  with an air of supreme hauteur, said, "What do you desire,
Title:  monsieur, and with what object do you present yourself here?"
Title:  
Title:  "To make, madame, in the name of the king, and without prejudice
Title:  to the respect which I have the honor to owe to your Majesty a
Title:  close examination into all your papers."
Title:  
Title:  "How, monsieur, an investigation of my papers--mine!  Truly, this
Title:  is an indignity!"
Title:  
Title:  "Be kind enough to pardon me, madame; but in this circumstance I
Title:  am but the instrument which the king employs.  Has not his
Title:  Majesty just left you, and has he not himself asked you to
Title:  prepare for this visit?"
Title:  
Title:  "Search, then, monsieur!  I am a criminal, as it appears.
Title:  Estafania, give up the keys of my drawers and my desks."
Title:  
Title:  For form's sake the chancellor paid a visit to the pieces of
Title:  furniture named; but he well knew that it was not in a piece of
Title:  furniture that the queen would place the important letter she had
Title:  written that day.
Title:  
Title:  When the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawers
Title:  of the secretaries, it became necessary, whatever hesitation he
Title:  might experience--it became necessary, I say, to come to the
Title:  conclusion of the affair; that is to say, to search the queen
Title:  herself.  The chancellor advanced, therefore, toward Anne of
Title:  Austria, and said with a very perplexed and embarrassed air, "And
Title:  now it remains for me to make the principal examination."
Title:  
Title:  "What is that?" asked the queen, who did not understand, or
Title:  rather was not willing to understand.
Title:  
Title:  "His majesty is certain that a letter has been written by you
Title:  during the day; he knows that it has not yet been sent to its
Title:  address.  This letter is not in your table nor in your secretary;
Title:  and yet this letter must be somewhere."
Title:  
Title:  "Would you dare to lift your hand to your queen?" said Anne of
Title:  Austria, drawing herself up to her full height, and fixing her
Title:  eyes upon the chancellor with an expression almost threatening.
Title:  
Title:  "I am a faithful subject of the king, madame, and all that his
Title:  Majesty commands I shall do."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, it is true!" said Anne of Austria; "and the spies of the
Title:  cardinal have served him faithfully.  I have written a letter
Title:  today; that letter is not yet gone.  The letter is here."  And
Title:  the queen laid her beautiful hand on her bosom.
Title:  
Title:  "Then give me that letter, madame," said the chancellor.
Title:  
Title:  "I will give it to none but the king monsieur," said Anne.
Title:  
Title:  "If the king had desired that the letter should be given to him,
Title:  madame, he would have demanded it of you himself.  But I repeat
Title:  to you, I am charged with reclaiming it; and if you do not give
Title:  it up--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "He has, then, charged me to take it from you."
Title:  
Title:  "How!  What do you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "That my orders go far, madame; and that I am authorized to seek
Title:  for the suspected paper, even on the person of your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "What horror!" cried the queen.
Title:  
Title:  "Be kind enough, then, madame, to act more compliantly."
Title:  
Title:  "The conduct is infamously violent!  Do you know that, monsieur?"
Title:  
Title:  "The king commands it, madame; excuse me."
Title:  
Title:  "I will not suffer it!  No, no, I would rather die!" cried the
Title:  queen, in whom the imperious blood of Spain and Austria began to
Title:  rise.
Title:  
Title:  The chancellor made a profound reverence.  Then, with the
Title:  intention quite patent of not drawing back a foot from the
Title:  accomplishment of the commission with which he was charged, and
Title:  as the attendant of an executioner might have done in the chamber
Title:  of torture, he approached Anne of Austria, for whose eyes at the
Title:  same instant sprang tears of rage.
Title:  
Title:  The queen was, as we have said, of great beauty.  The commission
Title:  might well be called delicate; and the king had reached, in his
Title:  jealousy of Buckingham, the point of not being jealous of anyone
Title:  else.
Title:  
Title:  Without doubt the chancellor, Seguier looked about at that moment
Title:  for the rope of the famous bell; but not finding it he summoned
Title:  his resolution, and stretched forth his hands toward the place
Title:  where the queen had acknowledged the paper was to be found.
Title:  
Title:  Anne of Austria took one step backward, became so pale that it
Title:  might be said she was dying, and leaning with her left hand upon
Title:  a table behind her to keep herself from falling, she with her
Title:  right hand drew the paper from her bosom and held it out to the
Title:  keeper of the seals.
Title:  
Title:  "There, monsieur, there is that letter!" cried the queen, with a
Title:  broken and trembling voice; "take it, and deliver me from your
Title:  odious presence."
Title:  
Title:  The chancellor, who, on his part, trembled with an emotion easily
Title:  to be conceived, took the letter, bowed to the ground, and
Title:  retired.  The door was scarcely closed upon him, when the queen
Title:  sank, half fainting, into the arms of her women.
Title:  
Title:  The chancellor carried the letter to the king without having read
Title:  a single word of it.  The king took it with a trembling hand,
Title:  looked for the address, which was wanting, became very pale,
Title:  opened it slowly, then seeing by the first words that it was
Title:  addressed to the King of Spain, he read it rapidly.
Title:  
Title:  It was nothing but a plan of attack against the cardinal.  The
Title:  queen pressed her brother and the Emperor of Austria to appear to
Title:  be wounded, as they really were, by the policy of Richelieu--the
Title:  eternal object of which was the abasement of the house of
Title:  Austria--to declare war against France, and as a condition of
Title:  peace, to insist upon the dismissal of the cardinal; but as to
Title:  love, there was not a single word about it in all the letter.
Title:  
Title:  The king, quite delighted, inquired if the cardinal was still at
Title:  the Louvre; he was told that his Eminence awaited the orders of
Title:  his Majesty in the business cabinet.
Title:  
Title:  The king went straight to him.
Title:  
Title:  "There, Duke," said he, "you were right and I was wrong.  The
Title:  whole intrigue is political, and there is not the least question
Title:  of love in this letter; but, on the other hand, there is abundant
Title:  question of you."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal took the letter, and read it with the greatest
Title:  attention; then, when he had arrived at the end of it, he read it
Title:  a second time.  "Well, your Majesty," said he, "you see how far
Title:  my enemies go; they menace you with two wars if you do not
Title:  dismiss me.  In your place, in truth, sire, I should yield to
Title:  such powerful instance; and on my part, it would be a real
Title:  happiness to withdraw from public affairs."
Title:  
Title:  "What say you, Duke?"
Title:  
Title:  "I say, sire, that my health is sinking under these excessive
Title:  struggles and these never-ending labors.  I say that according to
Title:  all probability I shall not be able to undergo the fatigues of
Title:  the siege of La Rochelle, and that it would be far better that
Title:  you should appoint there either Monsieur de Conde, Monsieur de
Title:  Bassopierre, or some valiant gentleman whose business is war, and
Title:  not me, who am a churchman, and who am constantly turned aside
Title:  for my real vocation to look after matters for which I have no
Title:  aptitude.  You would be the happier for it at home, sire, and I
Title:  do not doubt you would be the greater for it abroad."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Duke," said the king, "I understand you.  Be satisfied,
Title:  all who are named in that letter shall be punished as they
Title:  deserve, even the queen herself."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you say, sire?  God forbid that the queen should suffer
Title:  the least inconvenience or uneasiness on my account!  She has
Title:  always believed me, sire, to be her enemy; although your Majesty
Title:  can bear witness that I have always taken her part warmly, even
Title:  against you.  Oh, if she betrayed your Majesty on the side of
Title:  your honor, it would be quite another thing, and I should be the
Title:  first to say, 'No grace, sire--no grace for the guilty!'
Title:  Happily, there is nothing of the kind, and your Majesty has just
Title:  acquired a new proof of it."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true, Monsieur Cardinal," said the king, "and you were
Title:  right, as you always are; but the queen, not the less, deserves
Title:  all my anger."
Title:  
Title:  "It is you, sire, who have now incurred hers.  And even if she
Title:  were to be seriously offended, I could well understand it; your
Title:  Majesty has treated her with a severity--"
Title:  
Title:  "It is thus I will always treat my enemies and yours, Duke,
Title:  however high they may be placed, and whatever peril I may incur
Title:  in acting severely toward them."
Title:  
Title:  "The queen is my enemy, but is not yours, sire; on the contrary,
Title:  she is a devoted, submissive, and irreproachable wife.  Allow me,
Title:  then, sire, to intercede for her with your Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "Let her humble herself, then, and come to me first."
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary, sire, set the example.  You have committed the
Title:  first wrong, since it was you who suspected the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "What!  I make the first advances?" said the king.  "Never!"
Title:  
Title:  "Sire, I entreat you to do so."
Title:  
Title:  "Besides, in what manner can I make advances first?"
Title:  
Title:  "By doing a thing which you know will be agreeable to her."
Title:  
Title:  "What is that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Give a ball; you know how much the queen loves dancing.  I will
Title:  answer for it, her resentment will not hold out against such an
Title:  attention."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Cardinal, you know that I do not like worldly
Title:  pleasures."
Title:  
Title:  "The queen will only be the more grateful to you, as she knows
Title:  your antipathy for that amusement; besides, it will be an
Title:  opportunity for her to wear those beautiful diamonds which you
Title:  gave her recently on her birthday and with which she has since
Title:  had no occasion to adorn herself."
Title:  
Title:  "We shall see, Monsieur Cardinal, we shall see," said the king,
Title:  who, in his joy at finding the queen guilty of a crime which he
Title:  cared little about, and innocent of a fault of which he had great
Title:  dread, was ready to make up all differences with her, "we shall
Title:  see, but upon my honor, you are too indulgent toward her."
Title:  
Title:  "Sire," said the cardinal, "leave severity to your ministers.
Title:  Clemency is a royal virtue; employ it, and you will find that you
Title:  derive advantage therein."
Title:  
Title:  Thereupon the cardinal, hearing the clock strike eleven, bowed
Title:  low, asking permission of the king to retire, and supplicating
Title:  him to come to a good understanding with the queen.
Title:  
Title:  Anne of Austria, who, in consequence of the seizure of her
Title:  letter, expected reproaches, was much astonished the next day to
Title:  see the king make some attempts at reconciliation with her.  Her
Title:  first movement was repellent.  Her womanly pride and her queenly
Title:  dignity had both been so cruelly offended that she could not come
Title:  round at the first advance; but, overpersuaded by the advice of
Title:  her women, she at last had the appearance of beginning to forget.
Title:  The king took advantage of this favorable moment to tell her that
Title:  her had the intention of shortly giving a fete.
Title:  
Title:  A fete was so rare a thing for poor Anne of Austria that at this
Title:  announcement, as the cardinal had predicted, the last trace of
Title:  her resentment disappeared, if not from her heart at least from
Title:  her countenance.  She asked upon what day this fete would take
Title:  place, but the king replied that he must consult the cardinal
Title:  upon that head.
Title:  
Title:  Indeed, every day the king asked the cardinal when this fete
Title:  should take place; and every day the cardinal, under some
Title:  pretext, deferred fixing it.  Ten days passed away thus.
Title:  
Title:  On the eighth day after the scene we have described, the cardinal
Title:  received a letter with the London stamp which only contained
Title:  these lines:  "I have them; but I am unable to leave London for
Title:  want of money.  Send me five hundred pistoles, and four or five
Title:  days after I have received them I shall be in Paris."
Title:  
Title:  On the same day the cardinal received this letter the king put
Title:  his customary question to him.
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu counted on his fingers, and said to himself, "She will
Title:  arrive, she says, four or five days after having received the
Title:  money.  It will require four or five days for the transmission of
Title:  the money, four or five days for her to return; that makes ten
Title:  days.  Now, allowing for contrary winds, accidents, and a woman's
Title:  weakness, there are twelve days."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, Monsieur Duke," said the king, "have you made your
Title:  calculations?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire.  Today is the twentieth of September.  The aldermen
Title:  of the city give a fete on the third of October.  That will fall
Title:  in wonderfully well; you will not appear to have gone out of your
Title:  way to please the queen."
Title:  
Title:  Then the cardinal added, "A PROPOS, sire, do not forget to tell
Title:  her Majesty the evening before the fete that you should like to
Title:  see how her diamond studs become her."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  17  BONACIEUX AT HOME
Title:  
Title:  It was the second time the cardinal had mentioned these diamond
Title:  studs to the king.  Louis XIII was struck with this insistence,
Title:  and began to fancy that this recommendation concealed some
Title:  mystery.
Title:  
Title:  More than once the king had been humiliated by the cardinal,
Title:  whose police, without having yet attained the perfection of the
Title:  modern police, were excellent, being better informed than
Title:  himself, even upon what was going on in his own household.  He
Title:  hoped, then, in a conversation with Anne of Austria, to obtain
Title:  some information from that conversation, and afterward to come
Title:  upon his Eminence with some secret which the cardinal either knew
Title:  or did not know, but which, in either case, would raise him
Title:  infinitely in the eyes of his minister.
Title:  
Title:  He went then to the queen, and according to custom accosted her
Title:  with fresh menaces against those who surrounded her.  Anne of
Title:  Austria lowered her head, allowed the torrent to flow on without
Title:  replying, hoping that it would cease of itself; but this was not
Title:  what Louis XIII meant.  Louis XIII wanted a discussion from which
Title:  some light or other might break, convinced as he was that the
Title:  cardinal had some afterthought and was preparing for him one of
Title:  those terrible surprises which his Eminence was so skillful in
Title:  getting up.  He arrived at this end by his persistence in
Title:  accusation.
Title:  
Title:  "But," cried Anne of Austria, tired of these vague attacks, "but,
Title:  sire, you do not tell me all that you have in your heart.  What
Title:  have I done, then?  Let me know what crime I have committed.  It
Title:  is impossible that your Majesty can make all this ado about a
Title:  letter written to my brother."
Title:  
Title:  The king, attacked in a manner so direct, did not know what to
Title:  answer; and he thought that this was the moment for expressing
Title:  the desire which he was not going to have made until the evening
Title:  before the fete.
Title:  
Title:  "Madame," said he, with dignity, "there will shortly be a ball at
Title:  the Hotel de Ville.  I wish, in order to honor our worthy
Title:  aldermen, you should appear in ceremonial costume, and above all,
Title:  ornamented with the diamond studs which I gave you on your
Title:  birthday.  That is my answer."
Title:  
Title:  The answer was terrible.  Anne of Austria believed that Louis
Title:  XIII knew all, and that the cardinal had persuaded him to employ
Title:  this long dissimulation of seven or eight days, which, likewise,
Title:  was characteristic.  She became excessively pale, leaned her
Title:  beautiful hand upon a CONSOLE, which hand appeared then like one
Title:  of wax, and looking at the king with terror in her eyes, she was
Title:  unable to reply by a single syllable.
Title:  
Title:  "You hear, madame," said the king, who enjoyed the embarrassment
Title:  to its full extent, but without guessing the cause.  "You hear,
Title:  madame?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire, I hear," stammered the queen.
Title:  
Title:  "You will appear at this ball?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "With those studs?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  The queen's paleness, if possible, increased; the king perceived
Title:  it, and enjoyed it with that cold cruelty which was one of the
Title:  worst sides of his character.
Title:  
Title:  "Then that is agreed," said the king, "and that is all I had to
Title:  say to you."
Title:  
Title:  "But on what day will this ball take place?" asked Anne of
Title:  Austria.
Title:  
Title:  Louis XIII felt instinctively that he ought not to reply to this
Title:  question, the queen having put it in an almost dying voice.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, very shortly, madame," said he; "but I do not precisely
Title:  recollect the date of the day.  I will ask the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "It was the cardinal, then, who informed you of this fete?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, madame," replied the astonished king; "but why do you ask
Title:  that?"
Title:  
Title:  "It was he who told you to invite me to appear with these studs?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, madame--"
Title:  
Title:  "It was he, sire, it was he!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, and what does it signify whether it was he or I?  Is there
Title:  any crime in this request?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you will appear?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sire."
Title:  
Title:  "That is well," said the king, retiring, "that is well; I count
Title:  upon it."
Title:  
Title:  The queen made a curtsy, less from etiquette than because her
Title:  knees were sinking under her.  The king went away enchanted.
Title:  
Title:  "I am lost," murmured the queen, "lost!--for the cardinal knows
Title:  all, and it is he who urges on the king, who as yet knows nothing
Title:  but will soon know everything.  I am lost!  My God, my God, my
Title:  God!"
Title:  
Title:  She knelt upon a cushion and prayed, with her head buried between
Title:  her palpitating arms.
Title:  
Title:  In fact, her position was terrible.  Buckingham had returned to
Title:  London; Mme. Chevreuse was at Tours.  More closely watched than
Title:  ever, the queen felt certain, without knowing how to tell which,
Title:  that one of her women had betrayed her.  Laporte could not leave
Title:  the Louvre; she had not a soul in the world in whom she could
Title:  confide.  Thus, while contemplating the misfortune which
Title:  threatened her and the abandonment in which she was left, she
Title:  broke out into sobs and tears.
Title:  
Title:  "Can I be of service to your Majesty?" said all at once a voice
Title:  full of sweetness and pity.
Title:  
Title:  The queen turned sharply round, for there could be no deception
Title:  in the expression of that voice; it was a friend who spoke thus.
Title:  
Title:  In fact, at one of the doors which opened into the queen's
Title:  apartment appeared the pretty Mme. Bonacieux.  She had been
Title:  engaged in arranging the dresses and linen in a closet when the
Title:  king entered; she could not get out and had heard all.
Title:  
Title:  The queen uttered a piercing cry at finding herself surprised--
Title:  for in her trouble she did not at first recognize the young woman
Title:  who had been given to her by Laporte.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, fear nothing, madame!" said the young woman, clasping her
Title:  hands and weeping herself at the queen's sorrows; "I am your
Title:  Majesty's, body and soul, and however far I may be from you,
Title:  however inferior may be my position, I believe I have discovered
Title:  a means of extricating your Majesty from your trouble."
Title:  
Title:  "You, oh, heaven, you!" cried the queen; "but look me in the
Title:  face.  I am betrayed on all sides.  Can I trust in you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, madame!" cried the young woman, falling on her knees; "upon
Title:  my soul, I am ready to die for your Majesty!"
Title:  
Title:  This expression sprang from the very bottom of the heart, and,
Title:  like the first, there was no mistaking it.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," continued Mme. Bonacieux, "yes, there are traitors here;
Title:  but by the holy name of the Virgin, I swear that no one is more
Title:  devoted to your Majesty than I am.  Those studs which the king
Title:  speaks of, you gave them to the Duke of Buckingham, did you not?
Title:  Those studs were enclosed in a little rosewood box which he held
Title:  under his arm?  Am I deceived?  Is it not so, madame?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God!" murmured the queen, whose teeth chattered
Title:  with fright.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, those studs," continued Mme. Bonacieux, "we must have them
Title:  back again."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, without doubt, it is necessary," cried the queen; "but how
Title:  am I to act?  How can it be effected?"
Title:  
Title:  "Someone must be sent to the duke."
Title:  
Title:  "But who, who?  In whom can I trust?"
Title:  
Title:  "Place confidence in me, madame; do me that honor, my queen, and
Title:  I will find a messenger."
Title:  
Title:  "But I must write."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes; that is indispensable.  Two words from the hand of your
Title:  Majesty and your private seal."
Title:  
Title:  "But these two words would bring about my condemnation, divorce,
Title:  exile!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, if they fell into infamous hands.  But I will answer for
Title:  these two words being delivered to their address."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!  I must then place my life, my honor, my reputation,
Title:  in your hands?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, madame, you must; and I will save them all."
Title:  
Title:  "But how?  Tell me at least the means."
Title:  
Title:  "My husband had been at liberty these two or three days.  I have
Title:  not yet had time to see him again.  He is a worthy, honest man
Title:  who entertains neither love nor hatred for anybody.  He will do
Title:  anything I wish.  He will set out upon receiving an order from
Title:  me, without knowing what he carries, and he will carry your
Title:  Majesty's letter, without even knowing it is from your Majesty,
Title:  to the address which is on it."
Title:  
Title:  The queen took the two hands of the young woman with a burst of
Title:  emotion, gazed at her as if to read her very heart, and seeing
Title:  nothing but sincerity in her beautiful eyes, embraced her
Title:  tenderly.
Title:  
Title:  "Do that," cried she, "and you will have saved my life, you will
Title:  have saved my honor!"
Title:  
Title:  "Do not exaggerate the service I have the happiness to render
Title:  your Majesty.  I have nothing to save for your Majesty; you are
Title:  only the victim of perfidious plots."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true, that is true, my child," said the queen, "you are
Title:  right."
Title:  
Title:  "Give me then, that letter, madame; time presses."
Title:  
Title:  The queen ran to a little table, on which were ink, paper, and
Title:  pens.  She wrote two lines, sealed the letter with her private
Title:  seal, and gave it to Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "And now," said the queen, "we are forgetting one very necessary
Title:  thing."
Title:  
Title:  "What is that, madame?"
Title:  
Title:  "Money."
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux blushed.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that is true," said she, "and I will confess to your
Title:  Majesty that my husband--"
Title:  
Title:  "Your husband has none.  Is that what you would say?"
Title:  
Title:  "He has some, but he is very avaricious; that is his fault.
Title:  Nevertheless, let not your Majesty be uneasy, we will find
Title:  means."
Title:  
Title:  "And I have none, either," said the queen.  Those who have read
Title:  the MEMOIRS of Mme. de Motteville will not be astonished at this
Title:  reply.  "But wait a minute."
Title:  
Title:  Anne of Austria ran to her jewel case.
Title:  
Title:  "Here," said she, "here is a ring of great value, as I have been
Title:  assured.  It came from my brother, the King of Spain.  It is
Title:  mine, and I am at liberty to dispose of it.  Take this ring;
Title:  raise money with it, and let your husband set out."
Title:  
Title:  "In an hour you shall be obeyed."
Title:  
Title:  "You see the address," said the queen, speaking so low that Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux could hardly hear what she said, "To my Lord Duke of
Title:  Buckingham, London."
Title:  
Title:  "The letter shall be given to himself."
Title:  
Title:  "Generous girl!" cried Anne of Austria.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux kissed the hands of the queen, concealed the paper
Title:  in the bosom of her dress, and disappeared with the lightness of
Title:  a bird.
Title:  
Title:  Ten minutes afterward she was at home.  As she told the queen,
Title:  she had not seen her husband since his liberation; she was
Title:  ignorant of the change that had taken place in him with respect
Title:  to the cardinal--a change which had since been strengthened by
Title:  two or three visits from the Comte de Rochefort, who had become
Title:  the best friend of Bonacieux, and had persuaded him, without much
Title:  trouble, was putting his house in order, the furniture of which he
Title:  had found mostly broken and his closets nearly empty--justice not
Title:  being one of the three things which King Solomon names as leaving
Title:  no traces of their passage.  As to the servant, she had run away at
Title:  the moment of her master's arrest.  Terror had had such an effect
Title:  upon the poor girl that she had never ceased walking from Paris
Title:  till she reached Burgundy, her native place.
Title:  
Title:  The worthy mercer had, immediately upon re-entering his house,
Title:  informed his wife of his happy return, and his wife had replied
Title:  by congratulating him, and telling him that the first moment she
Title:  could steal from her duties should be devoted to paying him a
Title:  visit.
Title:  
Title:  This first moment had been delayed five days, which, under any
Title:  other circumstances, might have appeared rather long to M.
Title:  Bonacieux; but he had, in the visit he had made to the cardinal
Title:  and in the visits Rochefort had made him, ample subjects for
Title:  reflection, and as everybody knows, nothing makes time pass more
Title:  quickly than reflection.
Title:  
Title:  This was the more so because Bonacieux's reflections were all
Title:  rose-colored.  Rochefort called him his friend, his dear
Title:  Bonacieux, and never ceased telling him that the cardinal had a
Title:  great respect for him.  The mercer fancied himself already on the
Title:  high road to honors and fortune.
Title:  
Title:  On her side Mme. Bonacieux had also reflected; but, it must be
Title:  admitted, upon something widely different from ambition.  In
Title:  spite of herself her thoughts constantly reverted to that
Title:  handsome young man who was so brave and appeared to be so much in
Title:  love.  Married at eighteen to M. Bonacieux, having always lived
Title:  among her husband's friends--people little capable of inspiring
Title:  any sentiment whatever in a young woman whose heart was above her
Title:  position--Mme. Bonacieux had remained insensible to vulgar
Title:  seductions; but at this period the title of gentleman had great
Title:  influence with the citizen class, and d'Artagnan was a gentleman.
Title:  Besides, he wore the uniform of the Guards, which next to that of
Title:  the Musketeers was most admired by the ladies.  He was, we
Title:  repeat, handsome, young, and bold; he spoke of love like a man
Title:  who did love and was anxious to be loved in return.  There was
Title:  certainly enough in all this to turn a head only twenty-three
Title:  years old, and Mme. Bonacieux had just attained that happy period
Title:  of life.
Title:  
Title:  The couple, then, although they had not seen each other for eight
Title:  days, and during that time serious events had taken place in
Title:  which both were concerned, accosted each other with a degree of
Title:  preoccupation.  Nevertheless, Bonacieux manifested real joy, and
Title:  advanced toward his wife with open arms.  Madame Bonacieux
Title:  presented her cheek to him.
Title:  
Title:  "Let us talk a little," said she.
Title:  
Title:  "How!" said Bonacieux, astonished.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I have something of the highest importance to tell you."
Title:  
Title:  "True," said he, "and I have some questions sufficiently serious
Title:  to put to you.  Describe to me your abduction, I pray you."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, that's of no consequence just now," said Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "And what does it concern, then--my captivity?"
Title:  
Title:  "I heard of it the day it happened; but as you were not guilty of
Title:  any crime, as you were not guilty of any intrigue, as you, in
Title:  short, knew nothing that could compromise yourself or anybody
Title:  else, I attached no more importance to that event than it
Title:  merited."
Title:  
Title:  "You speak very much at your ease, madame," said Bonacieux, hurt
Title:  at the little interest his wife showed in him.  "Do you know that
Title:  I was plunged during a day and night in a dungeon of the
Title:  Bastille?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, a day and night soon pass away.  Let us return to the object
Title:  that brings me here."
Title:  
Title:  "What, that which brings you home to me?  Is it not the desire of
Title:  seeing a husband again from whom you have been separated for a
Title:  week?" asked the mercer, piqued to the quick.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that first, and other things afterward."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak."
Title:  
Title:  "It is a thing of the highest interest, and upon which our future
Title:  fortune perhaps depends."
Title:  
Title:  "The complexion of our fortune has changed very much since I saw
Title:  you, Madam Bonacieux, and I should not be astonished if in the
Title:  course of a few months it were to excite the envy of many folks."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, particularly if you follow the instructions I am about to
Title:  give you."
Title:  
Title:  "Me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, you.  There is good and holy action to be performed,
Title:  monsieur, and much money to be gained at the same time."
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband, she
Title:  took him on his weak side.  But a man, were he even a mercer,
Title:  when he had talked for ten minutes with Cardinal Richelieu, is no
Title:  longer the same man.
Title:  
Title:  "Much money to be gained?" said Bonacieux, protruding his lip.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, much."
Title:  
Title:  "About how much?"
Title:  
Title:  "A thousand pistoles, perhaps."
Title:  
Title:  "What you demand of me is serious, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is indeed."
Title:  
Title:  "What must be done?"
Title:  
Title:  "You must go away immediately.  I will give you a paper which you
Title:  must not part with on any account, and which you will deliver
Title:  into the proper hands."
Title:  
Title:  "And whither am I to go?"
Title:  
Title:  "To London."
Title:  
Title:  "I go to London?  Go to!  You jest!  I have no business in
Title:  London."
Title:  
Title:  "But others wish that you should go there."
Title:  
Title:  "But who are those others?  I warn you that I will never again
Title:  work in the dark, and that I will know not only to what I expose
Title:  myself, but for whom I expose myself."
Title:  
Title:  "An illustrious person sends you; an illustrious person awaits
Title:  you.  The recompense will exceed your expectations; that is all I
Title:  promise you."
Title:  
Title:  "More intrigues!  Nothing but intrigues!  Thank you, madame, I am
Title:  aware of them now; Monsieur Cardinal has enlightened me on that
Title:  head."
Title:  
Title:  "The cardinal?" cried Mme. Bonacieux.  "Have you seen the
Title:  cardinal?"
Title:  
Title:  "He sent for me," answered the mercer, proudly.
Title:  
Title:  "And you responded to his bidding, you imprudent man?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I can't say I had much choice of going or not going, for I
Title:  was taken to him between two guards.  It is true also, that as I
Title:  did not then know his Eminence, if I had been able to dispense
Title:  with the visit, I should have been enchanted."
Title:  
Title:  "He ill-treated you, then; he threatened you?"
Title:  
Title:  "He gave me his hand, and called me his friend.  His friend!  Do
Title:  you hear that, madame?  I am the friend of the great cardinal!"
Title:  
Title:  "Of the great cardinal!"
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps you would contest his right to that title, madame?"
Title:  
Title:  "I would contest nothing; but I tell you that the favor of a
Title:  minister is ephemeral, and that a man must be mad to attach
Title:  himself to a minister.  There are powers above his which do not
Title:  depend upon a man or the issue of an event; it is to these powers
Title:  we should rally."
Title:  
Title:  "I am sorry for it, madame, but I acknowledge not her power but
Title:  that of the great man whom I have the honor to serve."
Title:  
Title:  "You serve the cardinal?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, madame; and as his servant, I will not allow you to be
Title:  concerned in plots against the safety of the state, or to serve
Title:  the intrigues of a woman who is not French and who has a Spanish
Title:  heart.  Fortunately we have the great cardinal; his vigilant eye
Title:  watches over and penetrates to the bottom of the heart."
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux was repeating, word for word, a sentence which he had
Title:  heard from the Comte de Rochefort; but the poor wife, who had
Title:  reckoned on her husband, and who, in that hope, had answered for
Title:  him to the queen, did not tremble the less, both at the danger
Title:  into which she had nearly cast herself and at the helpless state
Title:  to which she was reduced.  Nevertheless, knowing the weakness of
Title:  her husband, and more particularly his cupidity, she did not
Title:  despair of bringing him round to her purpose.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you are a cardinalist, then, monsieur, are you?" cried she;
Title:  "and you serve the party of those who maltreat your wife and
Title:  insult your queen?"
Title:  
Title:  "Private interests are as nothing before the interests of all.  I
Title:  am for those who save the state," said Bonacieux, emphatically.
Title:  
Title:  "And what do you know about the state you talk of?" said Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux, shrugging her shoulders.  "Be satisfied with being a
Title:  plain, straightforward citizen, and turn to that side which
Title:  offers the most advantages."
Title:  
Title:  "Eh, eh!" said Bonacieux, slapping a plump, round bag, which
Title:  returned a sound a money; "what do you think of this, Madame
Title:  Preacher?"
Title:  
Title:  "Whence comes that money?"
Title:  
Title:  "You do not guess?"
Title:  
Title:  "From the cardinal?"
Title:  
Title:  "From him, and from my friend the Comte de Rochefort."
Title:  
Title:  "The Comte de Rochefort!  Why it was he who carried me off!"
Title:  
Title:  "That may be, madame!"
Title:  
Title:  "And you receive silver from that man?"
Title:  
Title:  "Have you not said that that abduction was entirely political?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but that abduction had for its object the betrayal of my
Title:  mistress, to draw from me by torture confessions that might
Title:  compromise the honor, and perhaps the life, of my august
Title:  mistress."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame," replied Bonacieux, "your august mistress is a
Title:  perfidious Spaniard, and what the cardinal does is well done."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said the young woman, "I know you to be cowardly,
Title:  avaricious, and foolish, but I never till now believed you
Title:  infamous!"
Title:  
Title:  "Madame," said Bonacieux, who had never seen his wife in a
Title:  passion, and who recoiled before this conjugal anger, "madame,
Title:  what do you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "I say you are a miserable creature!" continued Mme. Bonacieux,
Title:  who saw she was regaining some little influence over her husband.
Title:  "You meddle with politics, do you--and still more, with
Title:  cardinalist politics?  Why, you sell yourself, body and soul, to
Title:  the demon, the devil, for money!"
Title:  
Title:  "No, to the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "It's the same thing," cried the young woman.  "Who calls
Title:  Richelieu calls Satan."
Title:  
Title:  "Hold your tongue, hold your tongue, madame!  You may be
Title:  overheard."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, you are right; I should be ashamed for anyone to know your
Title:  baseness."
Title:  
Title:  "But what do you require of me, then?  Let us see."
Title:  
Title:  "I have told you.  You must depart instantly, monsieur.  You must
Title:  accomplish loyally the commission with which I deign to charge
Title:  you, and on that condition I pardon everything, I forget
Title:  everything; and what is more," and she held out her hand to him,
Title:  "I restore my love."
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux was cowardly and avaricious, but he loved his wife.  He
Title:  was softened.  A man of fifty cannot long bear malice with a wife
Title:  of twenty-three.  Mme. Bonacieux saw that he hesitated.
Title:  
Title:  "Come!  Have you decided?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "But, my dear love, reflect a little upon what you require of me.
Title:  London is far from Paris, very far, and perhaps the commission
Title:  with which you charge me is not without dangers?"
Title:  
Title:  "What matters it, if you avoid them?"
Title:  
Title:  "Hold, Madame Bonacieux," said the mercer, "hold!  I positively
Title:  refuse; intrigues terrify me.  I have seen the Bastille.  My!
Title:  Whew!  That's a frightful place, that Bastille!  Only to think of
Title:  it makes my flesh crawl.  They threatened me with torture.  Do
Title:  you know what torture is?  Wooden points that they stick in
Title:  between your legs till your bones stick out!  No, positively I
Title:  will not go.  And, MORBLEU, why do you not go yourself?  For in
Title:  truth, I think I have hitherto been deceived in you.  I really
Title:  believe you are a man, and a violent one, too."
Title:  
Title:  "And you, you are a woman--a miserable woman, stupid and brutal.
Title:  You are afraid, are you?  Well, if you do not go this very
Title:  instant, I will have you arrested by the queen's orders, and I
Title:  will have you placed in the Bastille which you dread so much."
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux fell into a profound reflection.  He weighed the two
Title:  angers in his brain--that of the cardinal and that of the queen;
Title:  that of the cardinal predominated enormously.
Title:  
Title:  "Have me arrested on the part of the queen," said he, "and I--I
Title:  will appeal to his Eminence."
Title:  
Title:  At once Mme. Bonacieux saw that she had gone too far, and she was
Title:  terrified at having communicated so much.  She for a moment
Title:  contemplated with fright that stupid countenance, impressed with
Title:  the invincible resolution of a fool that is overcome by fear.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, be it so!" said she.  "Perhaps, when all is considered,
Title:  you are right.  In the long run, a man knows more about politics
Title:  than a woman, particularly such as, like you, Monsieur Bonacieux,
Title:  have conversed with the cardinal.  And yet it is very hard,"
Title:  added she, "that a man upon whose affection I thought I might
Title:  depend, treats me thus unkindly and will not comply with any of
Title:  my fancies."
Title:  
Title:  "That is because your fancies go too far," replied the triumphant
Title:  Bonacieux, "and I mistrust them."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I will give it up, then," said the young woman, sighing.
Title:  "It is well as it is; say no more about it."
Title:  
Title:  "At least you should tell me what I should have to do in London,"
Title:  replied Bonacieux, who remembered a little too late that
Title:  Rochefort had desired him to endeavor to obtain his wife's
Title:  secrets.
Title:  
Title:  "It is of no use for you to know anything about it," said the
Title:  young woman, whom an instinctive mistrust now impelled to draw
Title:  back.  "It was about one of those purchases that interest women--
Title:  a purchase by which much might have been gained."
Title:  
Title:  But the more the young woman excused herself, the more important
Title:  Bonacieux thought the secret which she declined to confide to
Title:  him.  He resolved then to hasten immediately to the residence of
Title:  the Comte de Rochefort, and tell him that the queen was seeking
Title:  for a messenger to send to London.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon me for quitting you, my dear Madame Bonacieux," said he;
Title:  "but, not knowing you would come to see me, I had made an
Title:  engagement with a friend.  I shall soon return; and if you will
Title:  wait only a few minutes for me, as soon as I have concluded my
Title:  business with that friend, as it is growing late, I will come
Title:  back and reconduct you to the Louvre."
Title:  
Title:  "Thank you, monsieur, you are not brave enough to be of any use
Title:  to me whatever," replied Mme. Bonacieux.  "I shall return very
Title:  safely to the Louvre all alone."
Title:  
Title:  "As you please, Madame Bonacieux," said the ex-mercer.  "Shall I
Title:  see you again soon?"
Title:  
Title:  "Next week I hope my duties will afford me a little liberty, and
Title:  I will take advantage of it to come and put things in order here,
Title:  as they must necessarily be much deranged."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well; I shall expect you.  You are not angry with me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not the least in the world."
Title:  
Title:  "Till then, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Till then."
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux kissed his wife's hand, and set off at a quick pace.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Mme. Bonacieux, when her husband had shut the street
Title:  door and she found herself alone; "that imbecile lacked but one
Title:  thing to become a cardinalist.  And I, who have answered for him
Title:  to the queen--I, who have promised my poor mistress--ah, my God,
Title:  my God!  She will take me for one of those wretches with whom the
Title:  palace swarms and who are placed about her as spies!  Ah,
Title:  Monsieur Bonacieux, I never did love you much, but now it is
Title:  worse than ever.  I hate you, and on my word you shall pay for
Title:  this!"
Title:  
Title:  At the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made her
Title:  raise her head, and a voice which reached her through the ceiling
Title:  cried, "Dear Madame Bonacieux, open for me the little door on the
Title:  alley, and I will come down to you."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  18  LOVER AND HUSBAND
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, Madame," said d'Artagnan, entering by the door which the
Title:  young woman opened for him, "allow me to tell you that you have a
Title:  bad sort of a husband."
Title:  
Title:  "You have, then, overheard our conversation?" asked Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux, eagerly, and looking at d'Artagnan with disquiet.
Title:  
Title:  "The whole."
Title:  
Title:  "But how, my God?"
Title:  
Title:  "By a mode of proceeding known to myself, and by which I likewise
Title:  overheard the more animated conversation which he had with the
Title:  cardinal's police."
Title:  
Title:  "And what did you understand by what we said?"
Title:  
Title:  "A thousand things.  In the first place, that, unfortunately,
Title:  your husband is a simpleton and a fool; in the next place, you
Title:  are in trouble, of which I am very glad, as it gives me a
Title:  opportunity of placing myself at your service, and God knows I am
Title:  ready to throw myself into the fire for you; finally, that the
Title:  queen wants a brave, intelligent, devoted man to make a journey
Title:  to London for her.  I have at least two of the three qualities
Title:  you stand in need of, and here I am."
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux made no reply; but her heart beat with joy and
Title:  secret hope shone in her eyes.
Title:  
Title:  "And what guarantee will you give me," asked she, "if I consent
Title:  to confide this message to you?"
Title:  
Title:  "My love for you.  Speak!  Command!  What is to be done?"
Title:  
Title:  "My God, my God!" murmured the young woman, "ought I to confide
Title:  such a secret to you, monsieur?  You are almost a boy."
Title:  
Title:  "I see that you require someone to answer for me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I admit that would reassure me greatly."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "No.  Who are these gentleman?"
Title:  
Title:  "Three of the king's Musketeers.  Do you know Monsieur de
Title:  Treville, their captain?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, him!  I know him; not personally, but from having heard
Title:  the queen speak of him more than once as a brave and loyal
Title:  gentleman."
Title:  
Title:  "You do not fear lest he should betray you to the cardinal?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no, certainly not!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, reveal your secret to him, and ask him whether, however
Title:  important, however valuable, however terrible it may be, you may
Title:  not confide it to me."
Title:  
Title:  "But this secret is not mine, and I cannot reveal it in this
Title:  manner."
Title:  
Title:  "You were about to confide it to Monsieur Bonacieux," said
Title:  d'Artagnan, with chagrin.
Title:  
Title:  "As one confides a letter to the hollow of a tree, to the wing of
Title:  a pigeon, to the collar of a dog."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet, me--you see plainly that I love you."
Title:  
Title:  "You say so."
Title:  
Title:  "I am an honorable man."
Title:  
Title:  "You say so."
Title:  
Title:  "I am a gallant fellow."
Title:  
Title:  "I believe it."
Title:  
Title:  "I am brave."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I am sure of that!"
Title:  
Title:  "Then, put me to the proof."
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux looked at the young man, restrained for a minute
Title:  by a last hesitation; but there was such an ardor in his eyes,
Title:  such persuasion in his voice, that she felt herself constrained
Title:  to confide in him.  Besides, she found herself in circumstances
Title:  where everything must be risked for the sake of everything.  The
Title:  queen might be as much injured by too much reticence as by too
Title:  much confidence; and--let us admit it--the involuntary sentiment
Title:  which she felt for her young protector decided her to speak.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen," said she; "I yield to your protestations, I yield to
Title:  your assurances.  But I swear to you, before God who hears us,
Title:  that if you betray me, and my enemies pardon me, I will kill
Title:  myself, while accusing you of my death."
Title:  
Title:  "And I--I swear to you before God, madame," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  "that if I am taken while accomplishing the orders you give me, I
Title:  will die sooner than do anything that may compromise anyone."
Title:  
Title:  Then the young woman confided in him the terrible secret of which
Title:  chance had already communicated to him a part in front of the
Title:  Samaritaine.  This was their mutual declaration of love.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was radiant with joy and pride.  This secret which he
Title:  possessed, this woman whom he loved!  Confidence and love made him
Title:  a giant.
Title:  
Title:  "I go," said he; "I go at once."
Title:  
Title:  "How, you will go!" said Mme. Bonacieux; "and your regiment, your
Title:  captain?"
Title:  
Title:  "By my soul, you had made me forget all that, dear Constance!
Title:  Yes, you are right; a furlough is needful."
Title:  
Title:  "Still another obstacle," murmured Mme. Bonacieux, sorrowfully.
Title:  
Title:  "As to that," cried d'Artagnan, after a moment of reflection, "I
Title:  shall surmount it, be assured."
Title:  
Title:  "How so?"
Title:  
Title:  "I will go this very evening to Treville, whom I will request to
Title:  ask this favor for me of his brother-in-law, Monsieur
Title:  Dessessart."
Title:  
Title:  "But another thing."
Title:  
Title:  "What?" asked d'Artagnan, seeing that Mme. Bonacieux hesitated to
Title:  continue.
Title:  
Title:  "You have, perhaps, no money?"
Title:  
Title:  "PERHAPS is too much," said d'Artagnan, smiling.
Title:  
Title:  "Then," replied Mme. Bonacieux, opening a cupboard and taking
Title:  from it the very bag which a half hour before her husband had
Title:  caressed so affectionately, "take this bag."
Title:  
Title:  "The cardinal's?" cried d'Artagnan, breaking into a loud laugh,
Title:  he having heard, as may be remembered, thanks to the broken
Title:  boards, every syllable of the conversation between the mercer and
Title:  his wife.
Title:  
Title:  "The cardinal's," replied Mme. Bonacieux.  "You see it makes a
Title:  very respectable appearance."
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU," cried d'Artagnan, "it will be a double amusing affair
Title:  to save the queen with the cardinal's money!"
Title:  
Title:  "You are an amiable and charming young man," said Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  "Be assured you will not find her Majesty ungrateful."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I am already grandly recompensed!" cried d'Artagnan.  "I
Title:  love you; you permit me to tell you that I do--that is already
Title:  more happiness than I dared to hope."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!" said Mme. Bonacieux, starting.
Title:  
Title:  "What!"
Title:  
Title:  "Someone is talking in the street."
Title:  
Title:  "It is the voice of--"
Title:  
Title:  "Of my husband!  Yes, I recognize it!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan ran to the door and pushed the bolt.
Title:  
Title:  "He shall not come in before I am gone," said he; "and when I am
Title:  gone, you can open to him."
Title:  
Title:  "But I ought to be gone, too.  And the disappearance of his
Title:  money; how am I to justify it if I am here?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are right; we must go out."
Title:  
Title:  "Go out?  How?  He will see us if we go out."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you must come up into my room."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said Mme. Bonacieux, "you speak that in a tone that
Title:  frightens me!"
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux pronounced these words with tears in her eyes.
Title:  d'Artagnan saw those tears, and much disturbed, softened, he
Title:  threw himself at her feet.
Title:  
Title:  "With me you will be as safe as in a temple; I give you my word
Title:  of a gentleman."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us go," said she, "I place full confidence in you, my
Title:  friend!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan drew back the bolt with precaution, and both, light as
Title:  shadows, glided through the interior door into the passage,
Title:  ascended the stairs as quietly as possible, and entered
Title:  d'Artagnan's chambers.
Title:  
Title:  Once there, for greater security, the young man barricaded the
Title:  door.  They both approached the window, and through a slit in the
Title:  shutter they saw Bonacieux talking with a man in a cloak.
Title:  
Title:  At sight of this man, d'Artagnan started, and half drawing his
Title:  sword, sprang toward the door.
Title:  
Title:  It was the man of Meung.
Title:  
Title:  "What are you going to do?" cried Mme. Bonacieux; "you will ruin
Title:  us all!"
Title:  
Title:  "But I have sworn to kill that man!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Your life is devoted from this moment, and does not belong to
Title:  you.  In the name of the queen I forbid you to throw yourself
Title:  into any peril which is foreign to that of your journey."
Title:  
Title:  "And do you command nothing in your own name?"
Title:  
Title:  "In my name," said Mme. Bonacieux, with great emotion, "in my
Title:  name I beg you!  But listen; they appear to be speaking of me."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan drew near the window, and lent his ear.
Title:  
Title:  M. Bonacieux had opened his door, and seeing the apartment, had
Title:  returned to the man in the cloak, whom he had left alone for an
Title:  instant.
Title:  
Title:  "She is gone," said he; "she must have returned to the Louvre."
Title:  
Title:  "You are sure," replied the stranger, "that she did not suspect
Title:  the intentions with which you went out?"
Title:  
Title:  "No," replied Bonacieux, with a self-sufficient air, "she is too
Title:  superficial a woman."
Title:  
Title:  "Is the young Guardsman at home?"
Title:  
Title:  "I do not think he is; as you see, his shutter is closed, and you
Title:  can see no light shine through the chinks of the shutters."
Title:  
Title:  "All the same, it is well to be certain."
Title:  
Title:  "How so?"
Title:  
Title:  "By knocking at his door.  Go."
Title:  
Title:  "I will ask his servant."
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux re-entered the house, passed through the same door that
Title:  had afforded a passage for the two fugitives, went up to
Title:  d'Artagnan's door, and knocked.
Title:  
Title:  No one answered.  Porthos, in order to make a greater display,
Title:  had that evening borrowed Planchet.  As to d'Artagnan, he took
Title:  care not to give the least sign of existence.
Title:  
Title:  The moment the hand of Bonacieux sounded on the door, the two
Title:  young people felt their hearts bound within them.
Title:  
Title:  "There is nobody within," said Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "Never mind.  Let us return to your apartment.  We shall be safer
Title:  there than in the doorway."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my God!" whispered Mme. Bonacieux, "we shall hear no more."
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary," said d'Artagnan, "we shall hear better."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan raised the three or four boards which made his chamber
Title:  another ear of Dionysius, spread a carpet on the floor, went upon
Title:  his knees, and made a sign to Mme. Bonacieux to stoop as he did
Title:  toward the opening.
Title:  
Title:  "You are sure there is nobody there?" said the stranger.
Title:  
Title:  "I will answer for it," said Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "And you think that your wife--"
Title:  
Title:  "Has returned to the Louvre."
Title:  
Title:  "Without speaking to anyone but yourself?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am sure of it."
Title:  
Title:  "That is an important point, do you understand?"
Title:  
Title:  "Then the news I brought you is of value?"
Title:  
Title:  "The greatest, my dear Bonacieux; I don't conceal this from you."
Title:  
Title:  "Then the cardinal will be pleased with me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have no doubt of it."
Title:  
Title:  "The great cardinal!"
Title:  
Title:  "Are you sure, in her conversation with you, that your wife
Title:  mentioned no names?"
Title:  
Title:  "I think not."
Title:  
Title:  "She did not name Madame de Chevreuse, the Duke of Buckingham, or
Title:  Madame de Vernet?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; she only told me she wished to send me to London to serve
Title:  the interests of an illustrious personage."
Title:  
Title:  "The traitor!" murmured Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!" said d'Artagnan, taking her hand, which, without
Title:  thinking of it, she abandoned to him.
Title:  
Title:  "Never mind," continued the man in the cloak; "you were a fool
Title:  not to have pretended to accept the mission.  You would then be
Title:  in present possession of the letter.  The state, which is now
Title:  threatened, would be safe, and you--"
Title:  
Title:  "And I?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well you--the cardinal would have given you letters of
Title:  nobility."
Title:  
Title:  "Did he tell you so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I know that he meant to afford you that agreeable
Title:  surprise."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied," replied Bonacieux; "my wife adores me, and there
Title:  is yet time."
Title:  
Title:  "The ninny!" murmured Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!" said d'Artagnan, pressing her hand more closely.
Title:  
Title:  "How is there still time?" asked the man in the cloak.
Title:  
Title:  "I go to the Louvre; I ask for Mme. Bonacieux; I say that I have
Title:  reflected; I renew the affair; I obtain the letter, and I run
Title:  directly to the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, go quickly!  I will return soon to learn the result of
Title:  your trip."
Title:  
Title:  The stranger went out.
Title:  
Title:  "Infamous!" said Mme. Bonacieux, addressing this epithet to her
Title:  husband.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!" said d'Artagnan, pressing her hand still more warmly.
Title:  
Title:  A terrible howling interrupted these reflections of d'Artagnan
Title:  and Mme. Bonacieux.  It was her husband, who had discovered the
Title:  disappearance of the moneybag, and was crying "Thieves!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!" cried Mme. Bonacieux, "he will rouse the whole
Title:  quarter."
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux called a long time; but as such cries, on account of
Title:  their frequency, brought nobody in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and as
Title:  lately the mercer's house had a bad name, finding that nobody
Title:  came, he went out continuing to call, his voice being heard
Title:  fainter and fainter as he went in the direction of the Rue du
Title:  Bac.
Title:  
Title:  "Now he is gone, it is your turn to get out," said Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux.  "Courage, my friend, but above all, prudence, and
Title:  think what you owe to the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "To her and to you!" cried d'Artagnan.  "Be satisfied, beautiful
Title:  Constance.  I shall become worthy of her gratitude; but shall I
Title:  likewise return worthy of your love?"
Title:  
Title:  The young woman only replied by the beautiful glow which mounted
Title:  to her cheeks.  A few seconds afterward d'Artagnan also went out
Title:  enveloped in a large cloak, which ill-concealed the sheath of a
Title:  long sword.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux followed him with her eyes, with that long, fond
Title:  look with which he had turned the angle of the street, she fell
Title:  on her knees, and clasping her hands, "Oh, my God," cried she,
Title:  "protect the queen, protect me!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  19  PLAN OF CAMPAIGN
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan went straight to M. de Treville's.  He had reflected
Title:  that in a few minutes the cardinal would be warned by this cursed
Title:  stranger, who appeared to be his agent, and he judged, with
Title:  reason, he had not a moment to lose.
Title:  
Title:  The heart of the young man overflowed with joy.  An opportunity
Title:  presented itself to him in which there would be at the same time
Title:  glory to be acquired, and money to be gained; and as a far higher
Title:  encouragement, it brought him into close intimacy with a woman he
Title:  adored.  This chance did, then, for him at once more than he
Title:  would have dared to ask of Providence.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville was in his saloon with his habitual court of
Title:  gentlemen.  D'Artagnan, who was known as a familiar of the house,
Title:  went straight to his office, and sent word that he wished to see
Title:  him on something of importance.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had been there scarcely five minutes when M. de
Title:  Treville entered.  At the first glance, and by the joy which was
Title:  painted on his countenance, the worthy captain plainly perceived
Title:  that something new was on foot.
Title:  
Title:  All the way along d'Artagnan had been consulting with himself
Title:  whether he should place confidence in M. de Treville, or whether
Title:  he should only ask him to give him CARTE BLANCHE for some secret
Title:  affair.  But M. de Treville had always been so thoroughly his
Title:  friend, had always been so devoted to the king and queen, and
Title:  hated the cardinal so cordially, that the young man resolved to
Title:  tell him everything.
Title:  
Title:  "Did you ask for me, my good friend?" said M. de Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, lowering his voice, "and you
Title:  will pardon me, I hope, for having disturbed you when you know
Title:  the importance of my business."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak, then, I am all attention."
Title:  
Title:  "It concerns nothing less," said d'Artagnan, "than the honor,
Title:  perhaps the life of the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "What did you say?" asked M. de Treville, glancing round to see
Title:  if they were surely alone, and then fixing his questioning look
Title:  upon d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I say, monsieur, that chance has rendered me master of a
Title:  secret--"
Title:  
Title:  "Which you will guard, I hope, young man, as your life."
Title:  
Title:  "But which I must impart to you, monsieur, for you alone can
Title:  assist me in the mission I have just received from her Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "Is this secret your own?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur; it is her Majesty's."
Title:  
Title:  "Are you authorized by her Majesty to communicate it to me?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur, for, on the contrary, I am desired to preserve the
Title:  profoundest mystery."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, then, are you about to betray it to me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because, as I said, without you I can do nothing; and I am
Title:  afraid you will refuse me the favor I come to ask if you do not
Title:  know to what end I ask it."
Title:  
Title:  "Keep your secret, young man, and tell me what you wish."
Title:  
Title:  "I wish you to obtain for me, from Monsieur Dessessart, leave of
Title:  absence for fifteen days."
Title:  
Title:  "When?"
Title:  
Title:  "This very night."
Title:  
Title:  "You leave Paris?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am going on a mission."
Title:  
Title:  "May you tell me whither?"
Title:  
Title:  "To London."
Title:  
Title:  "Has anyone an interest in preventing your arrival there?"
Title:  
Title:  "The cardinal, I believe, would give the world to prevent my
Title:  success."
Title:  
Title:  "And you are going alone?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am going alone."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case you will not get beyond Bondy.  I tell you so, by
Title:  the faith of de Treville."
Title:  
Title:  "How so?"
Title:  
Title:  "You will be assassinated."
Title:  
Title:  "And I shall die in the performance of my duty."
Title:  
Title:  "But your mission will not be accomplished."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true," replied d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Believe me," continued Treville, "in enterprises of this kind,
Title:  in order that one may arrive, four must set out."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you are right, monsieur," said d'Artagnan; "but you know
Title:  Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, and you know if I can dispose of
Title:  them."
Title:  
Title:  "Without confiding to them the secret which I am not willing to
Title:  know?"
Title:  
Title:  "We are sworn, once for all, to implicit confidence and
Title:  devotedness against all proof.  Besides, you can tell them that
Title:  you have full confidence in me, and they will not be more
Title:  incredulous than you."
Title:  
Title:  "I can send to each of them leave of absence for fifteen days,
Title:  that is all--to Athos, whose wound still makes him suffer, to go
Title:  to the waters of Forges; to Porthos and Aramis to accompany their
Title:  friend, whom they are not willing to abandon in such a painful
Title:  condition.  Sending their leave of absence will be proof enough
Title:  that I authorize their journey."
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, monsieur.  You are a hundred times too good."
Title:  
Title:  "Begone, then, find them instantly, and let all be done tonight!
Title:  Ha!  But first write your request to Dessessart.  Perhaps you had
Title:  a spy at your heels; and your visit, if it should ever be known
Title:  to the cardinal, will thus seem legitimate."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan drew up his request, and M. de Treville, on receiving
Title:  it, assured him that by two o'clock in the morning the four
Title:  leaves of absence should be at the respective domiciles of the
Title:  travelers.
Title:  
Title:  "Have the goodness to send mine to Athos's residence.  I should
Title:  dread some disagreeable encounter if I were to go home."
Title:  
Title:  "Be easy.  Adieu, and a prosperous voyage.  A PROPOS," said M. de
Title:  Treville, calling him back.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan returned.
Title:  
Title:  "Have you any money?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan tapped the bag he had in his pocket.
Title:  
Title:  "Enough?" asked M. de Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "Three hundred pistoles."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, plenty!  That would carry you to the end of the world.
Title:  Begone, then!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan saluted M. de Treville, who held out his hand to him;
Title:  d'Artagnan pressed it with a respect mixed with gratitude.  Since
Title:  his first arrival at Paris, he had had constant occasion to honor
Title:  this excellent man, whom he had always found worthy, loyal, and
Title:  great.
Title:  
Title:  His first visit was to Aramis, at whose residence he had not been
Title:  since the famous evening on which he had followed Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  Still further, he had seldom seen the young Musketeer; but every
Title:  time he had seen him, he had remarked a deep sadness imprinted on
Title:  his countenance.
Title:  
Title:  This evening, especially, Aramis was melancholy and thoughtful.
Title:  d'Artagnan asked some questions about this prolonged melancholy.
Title:  Aramis pleaded as his excuse a commentary upon the eighteenth
Title:  chapter of St. Augustine, which he was forced to write in Latin
Title:  for the following week, and which preoccupied him a good deal.
Title:  
Title:  After the two friends had been chatting a few moments, a servant
Title:  from M. de Treville entered, bringing a sealed packet.
Title:  
Title:  "What is that?" asked Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "The leave of absence Monsieur has asked for," replied the
Title:  lackey.
Title:  
Title:  "For me!  I have asked for no leave of absence."
Title:  
Title:  "Hold your tongue and take it!" said d'Artagnan.  "And you, my
Title:  friend, there is a demipistole for your trouble; you will tell
Title:  Monsieur de Treville that Monsieur Aramis is very much obliged to
Title:  him.  Go."
Title:  
Title:  The lackey bowed to the ground and departed.
Title:  
Title:  "What does all this mean?" asked Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Pack up all you want for a journey of a fortnight, and follow
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "But I cannot leave Paris just now without knowing--"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis stopped.
Title:  
Title:  "What is become of her?  I suppose you mean--" continued
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Become of whom?" replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "The woman who was here--the woman with the embroidered
Title:  handkerchief."
Title:  
Title:  "Who told you there was a woman here?" replied Aramis, becoming
Title:  as pale as death.
Title:  
Title:  "I saw her."
Title:  
Title:  "And you know who she is?"
Title:  
Title:  "I believe I can guess, at least."
Title:  
Title:  "Listen!" said Aramis.  "Since you appear to know so many things,
Title:  can you tell me what is become of that woman?"
Title:  
Title:  "I presume that she has returned to Tours."
Title:  
Title:  "To Tours?  Yes, that may be.  You evidently know her.  But why
Title:  did she return to Tours without telling me anything?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because she was in fear of being arrested."
Title:  
Title:  "Why has she not written to me, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because she was afraid of compromising you."
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan, you restore me to life!" cried Aramis.  "I fancied
Title:  myself despised, betrayed.  I was so delighted to see her again!
Title:  I could not have believed she would risk her liberty for me, and
Title:  yet for what other cause could she have returned to Paris?"
Title:  
Title:  "For the cause which today takes us to England."
Title:  
Title:  "And what is this cause?" demanded Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you'll know it someday, Aramis; but at present I must
Title:  imitate the discretion of 'the doctor's niece.'"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis smiled, as he remembered the tale he had told his friends
Title:  on a certain evening.  "Well, then, since she has left Paris, and
Title:  you are sure of it, d'Artagnan, nothing prevents me, and I am
Title:  ready to follow you.  You say we are going--"
Title:  
Title:  "To see Athos now, and if you will come thither, I beg you to
Title:  make haste, for we have lost much time already.  A PROPOS, inform
Title:  Bazin."
Title:  
Title:  "Will Bazin go with us?" asked Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps so.  At all events, it is best that he should follow us
Title:  to Athos's."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis called Bazin, and, after having ordered him to join them
Title:  at Athos's residence, said "Let us go then," at the same time
Title:  taking his cloak, sword, and three pistols, opening uselessly two
Title:  or three drawers to see if he could not find stray coin.  When
Title:  well assured this search was superfluous, he followed d'Artagnan,
Title:  wondering to himself how this young Guardsman should know so well
Title:  who the lady was to whom he had given hospitality, and that he
Title:  should know better than himself what had become of her.
Title:  
Title:  Only as they went out Aramis placed his hand upon the arm of
Title:  d'Artagnan, and looking at him earnestly, "You have not spoken of
Title:  this lady?" said he.
Title:  
Title:  "To nobody in the world."
Title:  
Title:  "Not even to Athos or Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have not breathed a syllable to them."
Title:  
Title:  "Good enough!"
Title:  
Title:  Tranquil on this important point, Aramis continued his way with
Title:  d'Artagnan, and both soon arrived at Athos's dwelling.  They
Title:  found him holding his leave of absence in one hand, and M. de
Title:  Treville's note in the other.
Title:  
Title:  "Can you explain to me what signify this leave of absence and
Title:  this letter, which I have just received?" said the astonished
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  My dear Athos,
Title:  
Title:  I wish, as your health absolutely requires it,
Title:  that you should rest for a fortnight.  Go, then, and take the
Title:  waters of Forges, or any that may be more agreeable to you, and
Title:  recuperate yourself as quickly as possible.
Title:  
Title:  Yours affectionate
Title:  
Title:  de Treville
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Well, this leave of absence and that letter mean that you must
Title:  follow me, Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "To the waters of Forges?"
Title:  
Title:  "There or elsewhere."
Title:  
Title:  "In the king's service?"
Title:  
Title:  "Either the king's or the queen's.  Are we not their Majesties'
Title:  servants?"
Title:  
Title:  At that moment Porthos entered.  "PARDIEU!" said he, "here is a
Title:  strange thing!  Since when, I wonder, in the Musketeers, did they
Title:  grant men leave of absence without their asking for it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Since," said d'Artagnan, "they have friends who ask it for
Title:  them."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "it appears there's something fresh
Title:  here."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, we are going--" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "To what country?" demanded Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!  I don't know much about it," said Athos.  "Ask
Title:  d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "To London, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "To London!" cried Porthos; "and what the devil are we going to
Title:  do in London?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is what I am not at liberty to tell you, gentlemen; you
Title:  must trust to me."
Title:  
Title:  "But in order to go to London," added Porthos, "money is needed,
Title:  and I have none."
Title:  
Title:  "Nor I," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Nor I," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I have," replied d'Artagnan, pulling out his treasure from his
Title:  pocket, and placing it on the table.  "There are in this bag
Title:  three hundred pistoles.  Let each take seventy-five; that is
Title:  enough to take us to London and back.  Besides, make yourselves
Title:  easy; we shall not all arrive at London."
Title:  
Title:  "Why so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because, in all probability, some one of us will be left on the
Title:  road."
Title:  
Title:  "Is this, then, a campaign upon which we are now entering?"
Title:  
Title:  "One of a most dangerous kind, I give you notice."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  But if we do risk being killed," said Porthos, "at least I
Title:  should like to know what for."
Title:  
Title:  "You would be all the wiser," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "And yet," said Aramis, "I am somewhat of Porthos's opinion."
Title:  
Title:  "Is the king accustomed to give you such reasons?  No.  He says
Title:  to you jauntily, 'Gentlemen, there is fighting going on in
Title:  Gascony or in Flanders; go and fight,' and you go there.  Why?
Title:  You need give yourselves no more uneasiness about this."
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan is right," said Athos; "here are our three leaves of
Title:  absence which came from Monsieur de Treville, and here are three
Title:  hundred pistoles which came from I don't know where.  So let us
Title:  go and get killed where we are told to go.  Is life worth the
Title:  trouble of so many questions?  D'Artagnan, I am ready to follow
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "And I also," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "And I also," said Aramis.  "And, indeed, I am not sorry to quit
Title:  Paris; I had need of distraction."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured,"
Title:  said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "And, now, when are we to go?" asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Immediately," replied d'Artagnan; "we have not a minute to
Title:  lose."
Title:  
Title:  "Hello, Grimaud!  Planchet!  Mousqueton!  Bazin!" cried the four
Title:  young men, calling their lackeys, "clean my boots, and fetch the
Title:  horses from the hotel."
Title:  
Title:  Each Musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel, as
Title:  at a barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey.  Planchet,
Title:  Grimaud, Mousqueton, and Bazin set off at full speed.
Title:  
Title:  "Now let us lay down the plan of campaign," said Porthos.  "Where
Title:  do we go first?"
Title:  
Title:  "To Calais," said d'Artagnan; "that is the most direct line to
Title:  London."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Porthos, "this is my advice--"
Title:  
Title:  "Speak!"
Title:  
Title:  "Four men traveling together would be suspected.  D'Artagnan will
Title:  give each of us his instructions.  I will go by the way of
Title:  Boulogne to clear the way; Athos will set out two hours after, by
Title:  that of Amiens; Aramis will follow us by that of Noyon; as to
Title:  d'Artagnan, he will go by what route he thinks is best, in
Title:  Planchet's clothes, while Planchet will follow us like
Title:  d'Artagnan, in the uniform of the Guards."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Athos, "my opinion is that it is not proper to
Title:  allow lackeys to have anything to do in such an affair.  A secret
Title:  may, by chance, be betrayed by gentlemen; but it is almost
Title:  always sold by lackeys."
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos's plan appears to me to be impracticable," said
Title:  d'Artagnan, "inasmuch as I am myself ignorant of what
Title:  instructions I can give you.  I am the bearer of a letter, that
Title:  is all.  I have not, and I cannot make three copies of that
Title:  letter, because it is sealed.  We must, then, as it appears to
Title:  me, travel in company.  This letter is here, in this pocket," and
Title:  he pointed to the pocket which contained the letter.  "If I
Title:  should be killed, one of you must take it, and continue the
Title:  route; if he be killed, it will be another's turn, and so on--
Title:  provided a single one arrives, that is all that is required."
Title:  
Title:  "Bravo, d'Artagnan, your opinion is mine," cried Athos, "Besides,
Title:  we must be consistent; I am going to take the waters, you will
Title:  accompany me.  Instead of taking the waters of Forges, I go and
Title:  take sea waters; I am free to do so.  If anyone wishes to stop
Title:  us, I will show Monsieur de Treville's letter, and you will show
Title:  your leaves of absence.  If we are attacked, we will defend
Title:  ourselves; if we are tried, we will stoutly maintain that we were
Title:  only anxious to dip ourselves a certain number of times in the
Title:  sea.  They would have an easy bargain of four isolated men;
Title:  whereas four men together make a troop.  We will arm our four
Title:  lackeys with pistols and musketoons; if they send an army out
Title:  against us, we will give battle, and the survivor, as d'Artagnan
Title:  says, will carry the letter."
Title:  
Title:  "Well said," cried Aramis; "you don't often speak, Athos, but
Title:  when you do speak, it is like St. John of the Golden Mouth.  I
Title:  agree to Athos's plan.  And you, Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "I agree to it, too," said Porthos, "if d'Artagnan approves of
Title:  it.  D'Artagnan, being the bearer of the letter, is naturally the
Title:  head of the enterprise; let him decide, and we will execute."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said d'Artagnan, "I decide that we should adopt Athos's
Title:  plan, and that we set off in half an hour."
Title:  
Title:  "Agreed!" shouted the three Musketeers in chorus.
Title:  
Title:  Each one, stretching out his hand to the bag, took his seventy-
Title:  five pistoles, and made his preparations to set out at the time
Title:  appointed.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  20  THE JOURNEY
Title:  
Title:  At two o'clock in the morning, our four adventurers left Paris by
Title:  the Barriere St. Denis.  As long as it was dark they remained
Title:  silent; in spite of themselves they submitted to the influence of
Title:  the obscurity, and apprehended ambushes on every side.
Title:  
Title:  With the first rays of day their tongues were loosened; with the
Title:  sun gaiety revived.  It was like the eve of a battle; the heart
Title:  beat, the eyes laughed, and they felt that the life they were
Title:  perhaps going to lose, was, after all, a good thing.
Title:  
Title:  Besides, the appearance of the caravan was formidable.  The black
Title:  horses of the Musketeers, their martial carriage, with the
Title:  regimental step of these noble companions of the soldier, would
Title:  have betrayed the most strict incognito.  The lackeys followed,
Title:  armed to the teeth.
Title:  
Title:  All went well till they arrived at Chantilly, which they reached
Title:  about eight o'clock in the morning.  They needed breakfast, and
Title:  alighted at the door of an AUBERGE, recommended by a sign
Title:  representing St. Martin giving half his cloak to a poor man.
Title:  They ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle the horses, and to hold
Title:  themselves in readiness to set off again immediately.
Title:  
Title:  They entered the common hall, and placed themselves at table.  A
Title:  gentleman, who had just arrived by the route of Dammartin, was
Title:  seated at the same table, and was breakfasting.  He opened the
Title:  conversation about rain and fine weather; the travelers replied.
Title:  He drank to their good health, and the travelers returned his
Title:  politeness.
Title:  
Title:  But at the moment Mousqueton came to announce that the horses
Title:  were ready, and they were arising from table, the stranger
Title:  proposed to Porthos to drink the health of the cardinal.  Porthos
Title:  replied that he asked no better if the stranger, in his turn,
Title:  would drink the health of the king.  The stranger cried that he
Title:  acknowledged no other king but his Eminence.  Porthos called him
Title:  drunk, and the stranger drew his sword.
Title:  
Title:  "You have committed a piece of folly," said Athos, "but it can't
Title:  be helped; there is no drawing back.  Kill the fellow, and rejoin
Title:  us as soon as you can."
Title:  
Title:  All three remounted their horses, and set out at a good pace,
Title:  while Porthos was promising his adversary to perforate him with
Title:  all the thrusts known in the fencing schools.
Title:  
Title:  "There goes one!" cried Athos, at the end of five hundred paces.
Title:  
Title:  "But why did that man attack Porthos rather than any other one of
Title:  us?" asked Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Because, as Porthos was talking louder than the rest of us, he
Title:  took him for the chief," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I always said that this cadet from Gascony was a well of
Title:  wisdom," murmured Athos; and the travelers continued their route.
Title:  
Title:  At Beauvais they stopped two hours, as well to breathe their
Title:  horses a little as to wait for Porthos.  At the end of two hours,
Title:  as Porthos did not come, not any news of him, they resumed their
Title:  journey.
Title:  
Title:  At a league from Beauvais, where the road was confined between
Title:  two high banks, they fell in with eight or ten men who, taking
Title:  advantage of the road being unpaved in this spot, appeared to be
Title:  employed in digging holes and filling up the ruts with mud.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis, not liking to soil his boots with this artificial mortar,
Title:  apostrophized them rather sharply.  Athos wished to restrain him,
Title:  but it was too late.  The laborers began to jeer the travelers
Title:  and by their insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the cool
Title:  Athos, who urged on his horse against one of them.
Title:  
Title:  Then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch, from which
Title:  each took a concealed musket; the result was that our seven
Title:  travelers were outnumbered in weapons.  Aramis received a ball
Title:  which passed through his shoulder, and Mousqueton another ball
Title:  which lodged in the fleshy part which prolongs the lower portion
Title:  of the loins.  Therefore Mousqueton alone fell from his horse,
Title:  not because he was severely wounded, but not being able to see
Title:  the wound, he judged it to be more serious than it really was.
Title:  
Title:  "It was an ambuscade!" shouted d'Artagnan.  "Don't waste a
Title:  charge!  Forward!"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis, wounded as he was, seized the mane of his horse, which
Title:  carried him on with the others.  Mousqueton's horse rejoined
Title:  them, and galloped by the side of his companions.
Title:  
Title:  "That will serve us for a relay," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I would rather have had a hat," said d'Artagnan.  "Mine was
Title:  carried away by a ball.  By my faith, it is very fortunate that
Title:  the letter was not in it."
Title:  
Title:  "They'll kill poor Porthos when he comes up," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "If Porthos were on his legs, he would have rejoined us by this
Title:  time," said Athos.  "My opinion is that on the ground the drunken
Title:  man was not intoxicated."
Title:  
Title:  They continued at their best speed for two hours, although the
Title:  horses were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soon
Title:  refuse service.
Title:  
Title:  The travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they might
Title:  meet with less interruption; but at Crevecoeur, Aramis declared
Title:  he could proceed no farther.  In fact, it required all the
Title:  courage which he concealed beneath his elegant form and polished
Title:  manners to bear him so far.  He grew more pale every minute, and
Title:  they were obliged to support him on his horse.  They lifted him
Title:  off at the door of a cabaret, left Bazin with him, who, besides,
Title:  in a skirmish was more embarrassing than useful, and set forward
Title:  again in the hope of sleeping at Amiens.
Title:  
Title:  "MORBLEU," said Athos, as soon as they were again in motion,
Title:  "reduced to two masters and Grimaud and Planchet!  MORBLEU!  I
Title:  won't be their dupe, I will answer for it.  I will neither open
Title:  my mouth nor draw my sword between this and Calais.  I swear
Title:  by--"
Title:  
Title:  "Don't waste time in swearing," said d'Artagnan; "let us gallop,
Title:  if our horses will consent."
Title:  
Title:  And the travelers buried their rowels in their horses' flanks,
Title:  who thus vigorously stimulated recovered their energies.  They
Title:  arrived at Amiens at midnight, and alighted at the AUBERGE of the
Title:  Golden Lily.
Title:  
Title:  The host had the appearance of as honest a man as any on earth.
Title:  He received the travelers with his candlestick in one hand and
Title:  his cotton nightcap in the other.  He wished to lodge the two
Title:  travelers each in a charming chamber; but unfortunately these
Title:  charming chambers were at the opposite extremities of the hotel.
Title:  d'Artagnan and Athos refused them.  The host replied that he had
Title:  no other worthy of their Excellencies; but the travelers declared
Title:  they would sleep in the common chamber, each on a mattress which
Title:  might be thrown upon the ground.  The host insisted; but the
Title:  travelers were firm, and he was obliged to do as they wished.
Title:  
Title:  They had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door
Title:  within, when someone knocked at the yard shutter; they demanded
Title:  who was there, and recognizing the voices of their lackeys,
Title:  opened the shutter.  It was indeed Planchet and Grimaud.
Title:  
Title:  "Grimaud can take care of the horses," said Planchet.  "If you
Title:  are willing, gentlemen, I will sleep across your doorway, and you
Title:  will then be certain that nobody can reach you."
Title:  
Title:  "And on what will you sleep?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Here is my bed," replied Planchet, producing a bundle of straw.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, then," said d'Artagnan, "you are right.  Mine host's face
Title:  does not please me at all; it is too gracious."
Title:  
Title:  "Nor me either," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet mounted by the window and installed himself across the
Title:  doorway, while Grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable,
Title:  undertaking that by five o'clock in the morning he and the four
Title:  horses should be ready.
Title:  
Title:  The night was quiet enough.  Toward two o'clock in the morning
Title:  somebody endeavored to open the door; but as Planchet awoke in an
Title:  instant and cried, "Who goes there?" somebody replied that he was
Title:  mistaken, and went away.
Title:  
Title:  At four o'clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in the
Title:  stables.  Grimaud had tried to waken the stable boys, and the
Title:  stable boys had beaten him.  When they opened the window, they
Title:  saw the poor lad lying senseless, with his head split by a blow
Title:  with a pitchfork.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle the
Title:  horses; but the horses were all used up.  Mousqueton's horse
Title:  which had traveled for five or six hours without a rider the day
Title:  before, might have been able to pursue the journey; but by an
Title:  inconceivable error the veterinary surgeon, who had been sent
Title:  for, as it appeared, to bleed one of the host's horses, had bled
Title:  Mousqueton's.
Title:  
Title:  This began to be annoying.  All these successive accidents were
Title:  perhaps the result of chance; but they might be the fruits of a
Title:  plot.  Athos and d'Artagnan went out, while Planchet was sent to
Title:  inquire if there were not three horses for sale in the
Title:  neighborhood.  At the door stood two horses, fresh, strong, and
Title:  fully equipped.  These would just have suited them.  He asked
Title:  where their masters were, and was informed that they had passed
Title:  the night in the inn, and were then settling their bill with the
Title:  host.
Title:  
Title:  Athos went down to pay the reckoning, while d'Artagnan and
Title:  Planchet stood at the street door.  The host was in a lower and
Title:  back room, to which Athos was requested to go.
Title:  
Title:  Athos entered without the least mistrust, and took out two
Title:  pistoles to pay the bill.  The host was alone, seated before his
Title:  desk, one of the drawers of which was partly open.  He took the
Title:  money which Athos offered to him, and after turning and turning
Title:  it over and over in his hands, suddenly cried out that it was
Title:  bad, and that he would have him and his companions arrested as
Title:  forgers.
Title:  
Title:  "You blackguard!" cried Athos, going toward him, "I'll cut your
Title:  ears off!"
Title:  
Title:  At the same instant, four men, armed to the teeth, entered by
Title:  side doors, and rushed upon Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I am taken!" shouted Athos, with all the power of his lungs.
Title:  "Go on, d'Artagnan!  Spur, spur!" and he fired two pistols.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan and Planchet did not require twice bidding; they
Title:  unfastened the two horses that were waiting at the door, leaped
Title:  upon them, buried their spurs in their sides, and set off at full
Title:  gallop.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know what has become of Athos?" asked d'Artagnan of
Title:  Planchet, as they galloped on.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, "I saw one fall at each of his two
Title:  shots, and he appeared to me, through the glass door, to be
Title:  fighting with his sword with the others."
Title:  
Title:  "Brave Athos!" murmured d'Artagnan, "and to think that we are
Title:  compelled to leave him; maybe the same fate awaits us two paces
Title:  hence.  Forward, Planchet, forward!  You are a brave fellow."
Title:  
Title:  "As I told you, monsieur," replied Planchet, "Picards are found
Title:  out by being used.  Besides, I am here in my own country, and
Title:  that excites me."
Title:  
Title:  And both, with free use of the spur, arrived at St. Omer without
Title:  drawing bit.  At St. Omer they breathed their horses with the
Title:  bridles passed under their arms for fear of accident, and ate a
Title:  morsel from their hands on the stones of the street, after they
Title:  departed again.
Title:  
Title:  At a hundred paces from the gates of Calais, d'Artagnan's horse
Title:  gave out, and could not by any means be made to get up again, the
Title:  blood flowing from his eyes and his nose.  There still remained
Title:  Planchet's horse; but he stopped short, and could not be made to
Title:  move a step.
Title:  
Title:  Fortunately, as we have said, they were within a hundred paces of
Title:  the city; they left their two nags upon the high road, and ran
Title:  toward the quay.  Planchet called his master's attention to a
Title:  gentleman who had just arrived with his lackey, and only preceded
Title:  them by about fifty paces.  They made all speed to come up to
Title:  this gentleman, who appeared to be in great haste.  His boots
Title:  were covered with dust, and he inquired if he could not instantly
Title:  cross over to England.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing would be more easy," said the captain of a vessel ready
Title:  to set sail, "but this morning came an order to let no one leave
Title:  without express permission from the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "I have that permission," said the gentleman, drawing the paper
Title:  from his pocket; "here it is."
Title:  
Title:  "Have it examined by the governor of the port," said the
Title:  shipmaster, "and give me the preference."
Title:  
Title:  "Where shall I find the governor?"
Title:  
Title:  "At his country house."
Title:  
Title:  "And that is situated?"
Title:  
Title:  "At a quarter of a league from the city.  Look, you may see it
Title:  from here--at the foot of that little hill, that slated roof."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well," said the gentleman. And, with his lackey, he took
Title:  the road to the governor's country house.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan and Planchet followed the gentleman at a distance of
Title:  five hundred paces.  Once outside the city, d'Artagnan overtook
Title:  the gentleman as he was entering a little wood.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, you appear to be in great haste?"
Title:  
Title:  "No one can be more so, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "I am sorry for that," said d'Artagnan; "for as I am in great
Title:  haste likewise, I wish to beg you to render me a service."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "To let me sail first."
Title:  
Title:  "That's impossible," said the gentleman; "I have traveled sixty
Title:  leagues in forty hours, and by tomorrow at midday I must be in
Title:  London."
Title:  
Title:  "I have performed that same distance in forty hours, and by ten
Title:  o'clock in the morning I must be in London."
Title:  
Title:  "Very sorry, monsieur; but I was here first, and will not sail
Title:  second."
Title:  
Title:  "I am sorry, too, monsieur; but I arrived second, and must sail
Title:  first."
Title:  
Title:  "The king's service!" said the gentleman.
Title:  
Title:  "My own service!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "But this is a needless quarrel you seek with me, as it seems to
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "PARBLEU!  What do you desire it to be?"
Title:  
Title:  "What do you want?"
Title:  
Title:  "Would you like to know?"
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, I wish that order of which you are bearer, seeing
Title:  that I have not one of my own and must have one."
Title:  
Title:  "You jest, I presume."
Title:  
Title:  "I never jest."
Title:  
Title:  "Let me pass!"
Title:  
Title:  "You shall not pass."
Title:  
Title:  "My brave young man, I will blow out your brains.  HOLA, Lubin,
Title:  my pistols!"
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet," called out d'Artagnan, "take care of the lackey; I
Title:  will manage the master."
Title:  
Title:  Planchet, emboldened by the first exploit, sprang upon Lubin; and
Title:  being strong and vigorous, he soon got him on the broad of his
Title:  back, and placed his knee upon his breast.
Title:  
Title:  "Go on with your affair, monsieur," cried Planchet; "I have
Title:  finished mine."
Title:  
Title:  Seeing this, the gentleman drew his sword, and sprang upon
Title:  d'Artagnan; but he had too strong an adversary.  In three seconds
Title:  d'Artagnan had wounded him three times, exclaiming at each
Title:  thrust, "One for Athos, one for Porthos; and one for Aramis!"
Title:  
Title:  At the third hit the gentleman fell like a log.  D'Artagnan
Title:  believed him to be dead, or at least insensible, and went toward
Title:  him for the purpose of taking the order; but the moment he
Title:  extended his hand to search for it, the wounded man, who had not
Title:  dropped his sword, plunged the point into d'Artagnan's breast,
Title:  crying, "One for you!"
Title:  
Title:  "And one for me--the best for last!" cried d'Artagnan, furious,
Title:  nailing him to the earth with a fourth thrust through his body.
Title:  
Title:  This time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted.  D'Artagnan
Title:  searched his pockets, and took from one of them the order for the
Title:  passage.  It was in the name of Comte de Wardes.
Title:  
Title:  Then, casting a glance on the handsome young man, who was
Title:  scarcely twenty-five years of age, and whom he was leaving in his
Title:  gore, deprived of sense and perhaps dead, he gave a sigh for that
Title:  unaccountable destiny which leads men to destroy each other for
Title:  the interests of people who are strangers to them and who often
Title:  do not even know that they exist.  But he was soon aroused from
Title:  these reflections by Lubin, who uttered loud cries and screamed
Title:  for help with all his might.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet grasped him by the throat, and pressed as hard as he
Title:  could.  "Monsieur," said he, "as long as I hold him in this
Title:  manner, he can't cry, I'll be bound; but as soon as I let go he
Title:  will howl again.  I know him for a Norman, and Normans are
Title:  obstinate."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, tightly held as he was, Lubin endeavored still to cry
Title:  out.
Title:  
Title:  "Stay!" said d'Artagnan; and taking out his handkerchief, he
Title:  gagged him.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said Planchet, "let us bind him to a tree."
Title:  
Title:  This being properly done, they drew the Comte de Wardes close to
Title:  his servant; and as night was approaching, and as the wounded man
Title:  and the bound man were at some little distance within the wood,
Title:  it was evident they were likely to remain there till the next
Title:  day.
Title:  
Title:  "And now," said d'Artagnan, "to the Governor's."
Title:  
Title:  "But you are wounded, it seems," said Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, that's nothing!  Let us attend to what is more pressing
Title:  first, and then we will attend to my wound; besides, it does not
Title:  seem very dangerous."
Title:  
Title:  And they both set forward as fast as they could toward the
Title:  country house of the worthy functionary.
Title:  
Title:  The Comte de Wardes was announced, and d'Artagnan was introduced.
Title:  
Title:  "You have an order signed by the cardinal?" said the governor.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," replied d'Artagnan; "here it is."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!  It is quite regular and explicit," said the governor.
Title:  
Title:  "Most likely," said d'Artagnan; "I am one of his most faithful
Title:  servants."
Title:  
Title:  "It appears that his Eminence is anxious to prevent someone from
Title:  crossing to England?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; a certain d'Artagnan, a Bearnese gentleman who left Paris
Title:  in company with three of his friends, with the intention of going
Title:  to London."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know him personally?" asked the governor.
Title:  
Title:  "Whom?"
Title:  
Title:  "This d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "Perfectly well."
Title:  
Title:  "Describe him to me, then."
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing more easy."
Title:  
Title:  And d'Artagnan gave, feature for feature, a description of the
Title:  Comte de Wardes.
Title:  
Title:  "Is he accompanied?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; by a lackey named Lubin."
Title:  
Title:  "We will keep a sharp lookout for them; and if we lay hands on
Title:  them his Eminence may be assured they will be reconducted to
Title:  Paris under a good escort."
Title:  
Title:  "And by doing so, Monsieur the Governor," said d'Artagnan, "you
Title:  will deserve well of the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Shall you see him on your return, Monsieur Count?"
Title:  
Title:  "Without a doubt."
Title:  
Title:  "Tell him, I beg you, that I am his humble servant."
Title:  
Title:  "I will not fail."
Title:  
Title:  Delighted with this assurance the governor countersigned the
Title:  passport and delivered it to d'Artagnan.  D'Artagnan lost no time
Title:  in useless compliments.  He thanked the governor, bowed, and
Title:  departed.  Once outside, he and Planchet set off as fast as they
Title:  could; and by making a long detour avoided the wood and reentered
Title:  the city by another gate.
Title:  
Title:  The vessel was quite ready to sail, and the captain was waiting
Title:  on the wharf.  "Well?" said he, on perceiving d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Here is my pass countersigned," said the latter.
Title:  
Title:  "And that other gentleman?
Title:  
Title:  "He will not go today," said d'Artagnan; "but here, I'll pay you
Title:  for us two."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case let us go," said the shipmaster.
Title:  
Title:  "Let us go," repeated d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  He leaped with Planchet into the boat, and five minutes after
Title:  they were on board.  It was time; for they had scarcely sailed
Title:  half a league, when d'Artagnan saw a flash and heard a
Title:  detonation.  It was the cannon which announced the closing of the
Title:  port.
Title:  
Title:  He had now leisure to look to his wound.  Fortunately, as
Title:  d'Artagnan had thought, it was not dangerous.  The point of the
Title:  sword had touched a rib, and glanced along the bone.  Still
Title:  further, his shirt had stuck to the wound, and he had lost only
Title:  a few drops of blood.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was worn out with fatigue.  A mattress was laid upon
Title:  the deck for him.  He threw himself upon it, and fell asleep.
Title:  
Title:  On the morrow, at break of day, they were still three or four
Title:  leagues from the coast of England.  The breeze had been so light
Title:  all night, they had made but little progress.  At ten o'clock the
Title:  vessel cast anchor in the harbor of Dover, and at half past ten
Title:  d'Artagnan placed his foot on English land, crying, "Here I am at
Title:  last!"
Title:  
Title:  But that was not all; they must get to London.  In England the
Title:  post was well served.  D'Artagnan and Planchet took each a post
Title:  horse, and a postillion rode before them.  In a few hours they
Title:  were in the capital.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan did not know London; he did not know a word of
Title:  English; but he wrote the name of Buckingham on a piece of paper,
Title:  and everyone pointed out to him the way to the duke's hotel.
Title:  
Title:  The duke was at Windsor hunting with the king.  D'Artagnan
Title:  inquired for the confidential valet of the duke, who, having
Title:  accompanied him in all his voyages, spoke French perfectly well;
Title:  he told him that he came from Paris on an affair of life and
Title:  death, and that he must speak with his master instantly.
Title:  
Title:  The confidence with which d'Artagnan spoke convinced Patrick,
Title:  which was the name of this minister of the minister.  He ordered
Title:  two horses to be saddled, and himself went as guide to the young
Title:  Guardsman.  As for Planchet, he had been lifted from his horse as
Title:  stiff as a rush; the poor lad's strength was almost exhausted.
Title:  d'Artagnan seemed iron.
Title:  
Title:  On their arrival at the castle they learned that Buckingham and
Title:  the king were hawking in the marshes two or three leagues away.
Title:  In twenty minutes they were on the spot named.  Patrick soon
Title:  caught the sound of his master's voice calling his falcon.
Title:  
Title:  "Whom must I announce to my Lord Duke?" asked Patrick.
Title:  
Title:  "The young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on the
Title:  Pont Neuf, opposite the Samaritaine."
Title:  
Title:  "A singular introduction!"
Title:  
Title:  "You will find that it is as good as another."
Title:  
Title:  Patrick galloped off, reached the duke, and announced to him in
Title:  the terms directed that a messenger awaited him.
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham at once remembered the circumstance, and suspecting
Title:  that something was going on in France of which it was necessary
Title:  he should be informed, he only took the time to inquire where the
Title:  messenger was, and recognizing from afar the uniform of the
Title:  Guards, he put his horse into a gallop, and rode straight up to
Title:  d'Artagnan.  Patrick discreetly kept in the background.
Title:  
Title:  "No misfortune has happened to the queen?" cried Buckingham, the
Title:  instant he came up, throwing all his fear and love into the
Title:  question.
Title:  
Title:  "I believe not; nevertheless I believe she runs some great peril
Title:  from which your Grace alone can extricate her."
Title:  
Title:  "I!" cried Buckingham.  "What is it?  I should be too happy to be
Title:  of any service to her.  Speak, speak!"
Title:  
Title:  "Take this letter," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "This letter!  From whom comes this letter?"
Title:  
Title:  "From her Majesty, as I think."
Title:  
Title:  "From her Majesty!" said Buckingham, becoming so pale that
Title:  d'Artagnan feared he would faint as he broke the seal.
Title:  
Title:  "What is this rent?" said he, showing d'Artagnan a place where it
Title:  had been pierced through.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said d'Artagnan, "I did not see that; it was the sword of
Title:  the Comte de Wardes which made that hole, when he gave me a good
Title:  thrust in the breast."
Title:  
Title:  "You are wounded?" asked Buckingham, as he opened the letter.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, nothing but a scratch," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Just heaven, what have I read?" cried the duke.  "Patrick,
Title:  remain here, or rather join the king, wherever he may be, and
Title:  tell his Majesty that I humbly beg him to excuse me, but an
Title:  affair of the greatest importance recalls me to London.  Come,
Title:  monsieur, come!" and both set off towards the capital at full
Title:  gallop.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  21  THE COUNTESS DE WINTER
Title:  
Title:  As they rode along, the duke endeavored to draw from d'Artagnan,
Title:  not all that had happened, but what d'Artagnan himself knew.  By
Title:  adding all that he heard from the mouth of the young man to his
Title:  own remembrances, he was enabled to form a pretty exact idea of a
Title:  position of the seriousness of which, for the rest, the queen's
Title:  letter, short but explicit, gave him the clue.  But that which
Title:  astonished him most was that the cardinal, so deeply interested
Title:  in preventing this young man from setting his foot in England,
Title:  had not succeeded in arresting him on the road.  It was then,
Title:  upon the manifestation of this astonishment, that d'Artagnan
Title:  related to him the precaution taken, and how, thanks to the
Title:  devotion of his three friends, whom he had left scattered and
Title:  bleeding on the road, he had succeeded in coming off with a
Title:  single sword thrust, which had pierced the queen's letter and for
Title:  which he had repaid M. de Wardes with such terrible coin.  While
Title:  he was listening to this recital, delivered with the greatest
Title:  simplicity, the duke looked from time to time at the young man
Title:  with astonishment, as if he could not comprehend how so much
Title:  prudence, courage, and devotedness could be allied with a
Title:  countenance which indicated not more than twenty years.
Title:  
Title:  The horses went like the wind, and in a few minutes they were at
Title:  the gates of London.  D'Artagnan imagined that on arriving in
Title:  town the duke would slacken his pace, but it was not so.  He kept
Title:  on his way at the same rate, heedless about upsetting those whom
Title:  he met on the road.  In fact, in crossing the city two or three
Title:  accidents of this kind happened; but Buckingham did not even turn
Title:  his head to see what became of those he had knocked down.
Title:  d'Artagnan followed him amid cries which strongly resembled
Title:  curses.
Title:  
Title:  On entering the court of his hotel, Buckingham sprang from his
Title:  horse, and without thinking what became of the animal, threw the
Title:  bridle on his neck, and sprang toward the vestibule.  D'Artagnan
Title:  did the same, with a little more concern, however, for the noble
Title:  creatures, whose merits he fully appreciated; but he had the
Title:  satisfaction of seeing three or four grooms run from the kitchens
Title:  and the stables, and busy themselves with the steeds.
Title:  
Title:  The duke walked so fast that d'Artagnan had some trouble in
Title:  keeping up with him.  He passed through several apartments, of an
Title:  elegance of which even the greatest nobles of France had not even
Title:  an idea, and arrived at length in a bedchamber which was at once
Title:  a miracle of taste and of richness.  In the alcove of this
Title:  chamber was a door concealed in the tapestry which the duke
Title:  opened with a little gold key which he wore suspended from his
Title:  neck by a chain of the same metal.  With discretion d'Artagnan
Title:  remained behind; but at the moment when Buckingham crossed the
Title:  threshold, he turned round, and seeing the hesitation of the
Title:  young man, "Come in!" cried he, "and if you have the good fortune
Title:  to be admitted to her Majesty's presence, tell her what you have
Title:  seen."
Title:  
Title:  Encouraged by this invitation, d'Artagnan followed the duke, who
Title:  closed the door after them.  The two found themselves in a small
Title:  chapel covered with a tapestry of Persian silk worked with gold,
Title:  and brilliantly lighted with a vast number of candles.  Over a
Title:  species of altar, and beneath a canopy of blue velvet, surmounted
Title:  by white and red plumes, was a full-length portrait of Anne of
Title:  Austria, so perfect in its resemblance that d'Artagnan uttered a
Title:  cry of surprise on beholding it.  One might believe the queen was
Title:  about to speak.  On the altar, and beneath the portrait, was the
Title:  casket containing the diamond studs.
Title:  
Title:  The duke approached the altar, knelt as a priest might have done
Title:  before a crucifix, and opened the casket.  "There," said he,
Title:  drawing from the casket a large bow of blue ribbon all sparkling
Title:  with diamonds, "there are the precious studs which I have taken
Title:  an oath should be buried with me.  The queen gave them to me, the
Title:  queen requires them again.  Her will be done, like that of God,
Title:  in all things."
Title:  
Title:  Then, he began to kiss, one after the other, those dear studs
Title:  with which he was about to part.  All at once he uttered a
Title:  terrible cry.
Title:  
Title:  "What is the matter?" exclaimed d'Artagnan, anxiously; "what has
Title:  happened to you, my Lord?"
Title:  
Title:  "All is lost!" cried Buckingham, becoming as pale as a corpse;
Title:  "two of the studs are wanting, there are only ten."
Title:  
Title:  "Can you have lost them, my Lord, or do you think they have been
Title:  stolen?"
Title:  
Title:  "They have been stolen," replied the duke, "and it is the
Title:  cardinal who has dealt this blow.  Hold; see!  The ribbons which
Title:  held them have been cut with scissors."
Title:  
Title:  "If my Lord suspects they have been stolen, perhaps the person
Title:  who stole them still has them in his hands."
Title:  
Title:  "Wait, wait!" said the duke.  "The only time I have worn these
Title:  studs was at a ball given by the king eight days ago at Windsor.
Title:  The Comtesse de Winter, with whom I had quarreled, became
Title:  reconciled to me at that ball.  That reconciliation was nothing
Title:  but the vengeance of a jealous woman.  I have never seen her from
Title:  that day.  The woman is an agent of the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "He has agents, then, throughout the world?" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes," said Buckingham, grating his teeth with rage.  "Yes,
Title:  he is a terrible antagonist.  But when is this ball to take
Title:  place?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monday next."
Title:  
Title:  "Monday next!  Still five days before us.  That's more time than
Title:  we want.  Patrick!" cried the duke, opening the door of the
Title:  chapel, "Patrick!"  His confidential valet appeared.
Title:  
Title:  "My jeweler and my secretary."
Title:  
Title:  The valet went out with a mute promptitude which showed him
Title:  accustomed to obey blindly and without reply.
Title:  
Title:  But although the jeweler had been mentioned first, it was the
Title:  secretary who first made his appearance.  This was simply because
Title:  he lived in the hotel.  He found Buckingham seated at a table in
Title:  his bedchamber, writing orders with his own hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Mr. Jackson," said he, "go instantly to the Lord Chancellor, and
Title:  tell him that I charge him with the execution of these orders.  I
Title:  wish them to be promulgated immediately."
Title:  
Title:  "But, my Lord, if the Lord Chancellor interrogates me upon the
Title:  motives which may have led your Grace to adopt such an
Title:  extraordinary measure, what shall I reply?"
Title:  
Title:  "That such is my pleasure, and that I answer for my will to no
Title:  man."
Title:  
Title:  "Will that be the answer," replied the secretary, smiling, "which
Title:  he must transmit to his Majesty if, by chance, his Majesty should
Title:  have the curiosity to know why no vessel is to leave any of the
Title:  ports of Great Britain?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are right, Mr. Jackson," replied Buckingham.  "He will say,
Title:  in that case, to the king that I am determined on war, and that
Title:  this measure is my first act of hostility against France."
Title:  
Title:  The secretary bowed and retired.
Title:  
Title:  "We are safe on that side," said Buckingham, turning toward
Title:  d'Artagnan.  "If the studs are not yet gone to Paris, they will
Title:  not arrive till after you."
Title:  
Title:  "How so?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have just placed an embargo on all vessels at present in his
Title:  Majesty's ports, and without particular permission, not one dare
Title:  lift an anchor."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan looked with stupefaction at a man who thus employed
Title:  the unlimited power with which he was clothed by the confidence
Title:  of a king in the prosecution of his intrigues.  Buckingham saw by
Title:  the expression of the young man's face what was passing in his
Title:  mind, and he smiled.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said he, "yes, Anne of Austria is my true queen.  Upon a
Title:  word from her, I would betray my country, I would betray my king,
Title:  I would betray my God.  She asked me not to send the Protestants
Title:  of La Rochelle the assistance I promised them; I have not done
Title:  so.  I broke my word, it is true; but what signifies that?  I
Title:  obeyed my love; and have I not been richly paid for that
Title:  obedience?  It was to that obedience I owe her portrait."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was amazed to note by what fragile and unknown threads
Title:  the destinies of nations and the lives of men are suspended.  He
Title:  was lost in these reflections when the goldsmith entered.  He was
Title:  an Irishman--one of the most skillful of his craft, and who
Title:  himself confessed that he gained a hundred thousand livres a year
Title:  by the Duke of Buckingham.
Title:  
Title:  "Mr. O'Reilly," said the duke, leading him into the chapel, "look
Title:  at these diamond studs, and tell me what they are worth apiece."
Title:  
Title:  The goldsmith cast a glance at the elegant manner in which they
Title:  were set, calculated, one with another, what the diamonds were
Title:  worth, and without hesitation said, "Fifteen hundred pistoles
Title:  each, my Lord."
Title:  
Title:  "How many days would it require to make two studs exactly like
Title:  them?  You see there are two wanting."
Title:  
Title:  "Eight days, my Lord."
Title:  
Title:  "I will give you three thousand pistoles apiece if I can have
Title:  them by the day after tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, they shall be yours."
Title:  
Title:  "You are a jewel of a man, Mr. O'Reilly; but that is not all.
Title:  These studs cannot be trusted to anybody; it must be done in the
Title:  palace."
Title:  
Title:  "Impossible, my Lord!  There is no one but myself can so execute
Title:  them that one cannot tell the new from the old."
Title:  
Title:  "Therefore, my dear Mr. O'Reilly, you are my prisoner.  And if
Title:  you wish ever to leave my palace, you cannot; so make the best of
Title:  it.  Name to me such of your workmen as you need, and point out
Title:  the tools they must bring."
Title:  
Title:  The goldsmith knew the duke.  He knew all objection would be
Title:  useless, and instantly determined how to act.
Title:  
Title:  "May I be permitted to inform my wife?" said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you may even see her if you like, my dear Mr. O'Reilly.
Title:  Your captivity shall be mild, be assured; and as every
Title:  inconvenience deserves its indemnification, here is, in addition
Title:  to the price of the studs, an order for a thousand pistoles, to
Title:  make you forget the annoyance I cause you."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan could not get over the surprise created in him by this
Title:  minister, who thus open-handed, sported with men and millions.
Title:  
Title:  As to the goldsmith, he wrote to his wife, sending her the order
Title:  for the thousand pistoles, and charging her to send him, in
Title:  exchange, his most skillful apprentice, an assortment of
Title:  diamonds, of which he gave the names and the weight, and the
Title:  necessary tools.
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham conducted the goldsmith to the chamber destined for
Title:  him, and which, at the end of half an hour, was transformed into
Title:  a workshop.  Then he placed a sentinel at each door, with an
Title:  order to admit nobody upon any pretense but his VALET DE CHAMBRE,
Title:  Patrick.  We need not add that the goldsmith, O'Reilly, and his
Title:  assistant, were prohibited from going out under any pretext.
Title:  This point, settled, the duke turned to d'Artagnan.  "Now, my
Title:  young friend," said he, "England is all our own.  What do you
Title:  wish for?  What do you desire?"
Title:  
Title:  "A bed, my Lord," replied d'Artagnan.  "At present, I confess,
Title:  that is the thing I stand most in need of."
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham gave d'Artagnan a chamber adjoining his own.  He
Title:  wished to have the young man at hand--not that he at all
Title:  mistrusted him, but for the sake of having someone to whom he
Title:  could constantly talk of the queen.
Title:  
Title:  In one hour after, the ordinance was published in London that no
Title:  vessel bound for France should leave port, not even the packet
Title:  boat with letters.  In the eyes of everybody this was a
Title:  declaration of war between the two kingdoms.
Title:  
Title:  On the day after the morrow, by eleven o'clock, the two diamond
Title:  studs were finished, and they were so completely imitated, so
Title:  perfectly alike, that Buckingham could not tell the new ones from
Title:  the old ones, and experts in such matters would have been
Title:  deceived as he was.  He immediately called d'Artagnan.  "Here,"
Title:  said he to him, "are the diamond studs that you came to bring;
Title:  and be my witness that I have done all that human power could
Title:  do."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied, my Lord, I will tell all that I have seen.  But
Title:  does your Grace mean to give me the studs without the casket?"
Title:  
Title:  "The casket would encumber you.  Besides, the casket is the more
Title:  precious from being all that is left to me.  You will say that I
Title:  keep it."
Title:  
Title:  "I will perform your commission, word for word, my Lord."
Title:  
Title:  "And now," resumed Buckingham, looking earnestly at the young
Title:  man, "how shall I ever acquit myself of the debt I owe you?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan blushed up to the whites of his eyes.  He saw that the
Title:  duke was searching for a means of making him accept something and
Title:  the idea that the blood of his friends and himself was about to
Title:  be paid for with English gold was strangely repugnant to him.
Title:  
Title:  "Let us understand each other, my Lord," replied d'Artagnan, "and
Title:  let us make things clear beforehand in order that there may be no
Title:  mistake.  I am in the service of the King and Queen of France,
Title:  and form part of the company of Monsieur Dessessart, who, as well
Title:  as his brother-in-law, Monsieur de Treville, is particularly
Title:  attached to their Majesties.  What I have done, then, has been
Title:  for the queen, and not at all for your Grace.  And still further,
Title:  it is very probable I should not have done anything of this, if
Title:  it had not been to make myself agreeable to someone who is my
Title:  lady, as the queen is yours."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said the duke, smiling, "and I even believe that I know
Title:  that other person; it is--"
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, I have not named her!" interrupted the young man,
Title:  warmly.
Title:  
Title:  "That is true," said the duke; "and it is to this person I am
Title:  bound to discharge my debt of gratitude."
Title:  
Title:  "You have said, my Lord; for truly, at this moment when there is
Title:  question of war, I confess to you that I see nothing in your
Title:  Grace but an Englishman, and consequently an enemy whom I should
Title:  have much greater pleasure in meeting on the field of battle than
Title:  in the park at Windsor or the corridors of the Louvre--all which,
Title:  however, will not prevent me from executing to the very point my
Title:  commission or from laying down my life, if there be need of it,
Title:  to accomplish it; but I repeat it to your Grace, without your
Title:  having personally on that account more to thank me for in this
Title:  second interview than for what I did for you in the first."
Title:  
Title:  "We say, 'Proud as a Scotsman,'" murmured the Duke of Buckingham.
Title:  
Title:  "And we say, 'Proud as a Gascon,'" replied d'Artagnan.  "The
Title:  Gascons are the Scots of France."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan bowed to the duke, and was retiring.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, are you going away in that manner?  Where, and how?"
Title:  
Title:  "That's true!"
Title:  
Title:  "Fore Gad, these Frenchmen have no consideration!"
Title:  
Title:  "I had forgotten that England was an island, and that you were
Title:  the king of it."
Title:  
Title:  "Go to the riverside, ask for the brig SUND, and give this letter
Title:  to the captain; he will convey you to a little port, where
Title:  certainly you are not expected, and which is ordinarily only
Title:  frequented by fishermen."
Title:  
Title:  "The name of that port?"
Title:  
Title:  "St. Valery; but listen.  When you have arrived there you will go
Title:  to a mean tavern, without a name and without a sign--a mere
Title:  fisherman's hut.  You cannot be mistaken; there is but one."
Title:  
Title:  "Afterward?"
Title:  
Title:  "You will ask for the host, and will repeat to him the word
Title:  'Forward!'"
Title:  
Title:  "Which means?"
Title:  
Title:  "In French, EN AVANT.  It is the password.  He will give you a
Title:  horse all saddled, and will point out to you the road you ought
Title:  to take.  You will find, in the same way, four relays on your
Title:  route.  If you will give at each of these relays your address in
Title:  Paris, the four horses will follow you thither.  You already know
Title:  two of them, and you appeared to appreciate them like a judge.
Title:  They were those we rode on; and you may rely upon me for the
Title:  others not being inferior to them.  These horses are equipped for
Title:  the field.  However proud you may be, you will not refuse to
Title:  accept one of them, and to request your three companions to
Title:  accept the others--that is, in order to make war against us.
Title:  Besides, the end justified the means, as you Frenchmen say, does
Title:  it not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, my Lord, I accept them," said d'Artagnan; "and if it please
Title:  God, we will make a good use of your presents."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, now, your hand, young man.  Perhaps we shall soon meet on
Title:  the field of battle; but in the meantime we shall part good
Title:  friends, I hope."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, my Lord; but with the hope of soon becoming enemies."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied; I promise you that."
Title:  
Title:  "I depend upon your word, my Lord."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan bowed to the duke, and made his way as quickly as
Title:  possible to the riverside.  Opposite the Tower of London he found
Title:  the vessel that had been named to him, delivered his letter to
Title:  the captain, who after having it examined by the governor of the
Title:  port made immediate preparations to sail.
Title:  
Title:  Fifty vessels were waiting to set out.  Passing alongside one of
Title:  them, d'Artagnan fancied he perceived on board it the woman of
Title:  Meung--the same whom the unknown gentleman had called Milady, and
Title:  whom d'Artagnan had thought so handsome; but thanks to the
Title:  current of the stream and a fair wind, his vessel passed so
Title:  quickly that he had little more than a glimpse of her.
Title:  
Title:  The next day about nine o'clock in the morning, he landed at St.
Title:  Valery.  D'Artagnan went instantly in search of the inn, and
Title:  easily discovered it by the riotous noise which resounded from
Title:  it.  War between England and France was talked of as near and
Title:  certain, and the jolly sailors were having a carousal.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan made his way through the crowd, advanced toward the
Title:  host, and pronounced the word "Forward!"  The host instantly made
Title:  him a sign to follow, went out with him by a door which opened
Title:  into a yard, led him to the stable, where a saddled horse awaited
Title:  him, and asked him if he stood in need of anything else.
Title:  
Title:  "I want to know the route I am to follow," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Go from hence to Blangy, and from Blangy to Neufchatel.  At
Title:  Neufchatel, go to the tavern of the Golden Harrow, give the
Title:  password to the landlord, and you will find, as you have here, a
Title:  horse ready saddled."
Title:  
Title:  "Have I anything to pay?" demanded d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Everything is paid," replied the host, "and liberally.  Begone,
Title:  and may God guide you!"
Title:  
Title:  "Amen!" cried the young man, and set off at full gallop.
Title:  
Title:  Four hours later he was in Neufchatel.  He strictly followed the
Title:  instructions he had received.  At Neufchatel, as at St. Valery,
Title:  he found a horse quite ready and awaiting him.  He was about to
Title:  remove the pistols from the saddle he had quit to the one he was
Title:  about to fill, but he found the holsters furnished with similar
Title:  pistols.
Title:  
Title:  "Your address at Paris?"
Title:  
Title:  "Hotel of the Guards, company of Dessessart."
Title:  
Title:  "Enough," replied the questioner.
Title:  
Title:  "Which route must I take?" demanded d'Artagnan, in his turn.
Title:  
Title:  "That of Rouen; but you will leave the city on your right.  You
Title:  must stop at the little village of Eccuis, in which there is but
Title:  one tavern--the Shield of France.  Don't condemn it from
Title:  appearances; you will find a horse in the stables quite as good
Title:  as this."
Title:  
Title:  "The same password?"
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly."
Title:  
Title:  "Adieu, master!"
Title:  
Title:  "A good journey, gentlemen!  Do you want anything?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan shook his head, and set off at full speed.  At Eccuis,
Title:  the same scene was repeated.  He found as provident a host and a
Title:  fresh horse.  He left his address as he had done before, and set
Title:  off again at the same pace for Pontoise.  At Pontoise he changed
Title:  his horse for the last time, and at nine o'clock galloped into
Title:  the yard of Treville's hotel.  He had made nearly sixty leagues
Title:  in little more than twelve hours.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville received him as if he had seen him that same
Title:  morning; only, when pressing his hand a little more warmly than
Title:  usual, he informed him that the company of Dessessart was on duty
Title:  at the Louvre, and that he might repair at once to his post.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  22  THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON
Title:  
Title:  On the morrow, nothing was talked of in Paris but the ball which
Title:  the aldermen of the city were to give to the king and queen, and
Title:  in which their Majesties were to dance the famous La Merlaison--
Title:  the favorite ballet of the king.
Title:  
Title:  Eight days had been occupied in preparations at the Hotel de
Title:  Ville for this important evening.  The city carpenters had
Title:  erected scaffolds upon which the invited ladies were to be
Title:  placed; the city grocer had ornamented the chambers with two
Title:  hundred FLAMBEAUX of white wax, a piece of luxury unheard of at
Title:  that period; and twenty violins were ordered, and the price for
Title:  them fixed at double the usual rate, upon condition, said the
Title:  report, that they should be played all night.
Title:  
Title:  At ten o'clock in the morning the Sieur de la Coste, ensign in
Title:  the king's Guards, followed by two officers and several archers
Title:  of that body, came to the city registrar, named Clement, and
Title:  demanded of him all the keys of the rooms and offices of the
Title:  hotel.  These keys were given up to him instantly.  Each of them
Title:  had ticket attached to it, by which it might be recognized; and
Title:  from that moment the Sieur de la Coste was charged with the care
Title:  of all the doors and all the avenues.
Title:  
Title:  At eleven o'clock came in his turn Duhallier, captain of the
Title:  Guards, bringing with him fifty archers, who were distributed
Title:  immediately through the Hotel de Ville, at the doors assigned
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  At three o'clock came two companies of the Guards, one French,
Title:  the other Swiss.  The company of French guards was composed of
Title:  half of M. Duhallier's men and half of M. Dessessart's men.
Title:  
Title:  At six in the evening the guests began to come.  As fast as they
Title:  entered, they were placed in the grand saloon, on the platforms
Title:  prepared for them.
Title:  
Title:  At nine o'clock Madame la Premiere Presidente arrived.  As next
Title:  to the queen, she was the most considerable personage of the
Title:  fete, she was received by the city officials, and placed in a box
Title:  opposite to that which the queen was to occupy.
Title:  
Title:  At ten o'clock, the king's collation, consisting of preserves and
Title:  other delicacies, was prepared in the little room on the side of
Title:  the church of St. Jean, in front of the silver buffet of the
Title:  city, which was guarded by four archers.
Title:  
Title:  At midnight great cries and loud acclamations were heard.  It was
Title:  the king, who was passing through the streets which led from the
Title:  Louvre to the Hotel de Ville, and which were all illuminated with
Title:  colored lanterns.
Title:  
Title:  Immediately the aldermen, clothed in their cloth robes and
Title:  preceded by six sergeants, each holding a FLAMBEAU in his hand,
Title:  went to attend upon the king, whom they met on the steps, where
Title:  the provost of the merchants made him the speech of welcome--a
Title:  compliment to which his Majesty replied with an apology for
Title:  coming so late, laying the blame upon the cardinal, who had
Title:  detained him till eleven o'clock, talking of affairs of state.
Title:  
Title:  His Majesty, in full dress, was accompanied by his royal
Title:  Highness, M. le Comte de Soissons, by the Grand Prior, by the Duc
Title:  de Longueville, by the Duc d'Euboeuf, by the Comte d'Harcourt, by
Title:  the Comte de la Roche-Guyon, by M. de Liancourt, by M. de
Title:  Baradas, by the Comte de Cramail, and by the Chevalier de
Title:  Souveray.  Everybody noticed that the king looked dull and
Title:  preoccupied.
Title:  
Title:  A private room had been prepared for the king and another for
Title:  Monsieur.  In each of these closets were placed masquerade
Title:  dresses.  The same had been done for the queen and Madame the
Title:  President.  The nobles and ladies of their Majesties' suites were
Title:  to dress, two by two, in chambers prepared for the purpose.
Title:  Before entering his closet the king desired to be informed the
Title:  moment the cardinal arrived.
Title:  
Title:  Half an hour after the entrance of the king, fresh acclamations
Title:  were heard; these announced the arrival of the queen.  The
Title:  aldermen did as they had done before, and preceded by their
Title:  sergeants, advanced to receive their illustrious guest.  The
Title:  queen entered the great hall; and it was remarked that, like the
Title:  king, she looked dull and even weary.
Title:  
Title:  At the moment she entered, the curtain of a small gallery which
Title:  to that time had been closed, was drawn, and the pale face of the
Title:  cardinal appeared, he being dressed as a Spanish cavalier.  His
Title:  eyes were fixed upon those of the queen, and a smile of terrible
Title:  joy passed over his lips; the queen did not wear her diamond
Title:  studs.
Title:  
Title:  The queen remained for a short time to receive the compliments of
Title:  the city dignitaries and to reply to the salutations of the
Title:  ladies.  All at once the king appeared with the cardinal at one
Title:  of the doors of the hall.  The cardinal was speaking to him in a
Title:  low voice, and the king was very pale.
Title:  
Title:  The king made his way through the crowd without a mask, and the
Title:  ribbons of his doublet scarcely tied.  He went straight to the
Title:  queen, and in an altered voice said, "Why, madame, have you not
Title:  thought proper to wear your diamond studs, when you know it would
Title:  give me so much gratification?"
Title:  
Title:  The queen cast a glance around her, and saw the cardinal behind,
Title:  with a diabolical smile on his countenance.
Title:  
Title:  "Sire," replied the queen, with a faltering voice, "because, in
Title:  the midst of such a crowd as this, I feared some accident might
Title:  happen to them."
Title:  
Title:  "And you were wrong, madame.  If I made you that present it was
Title:  that you might adorn yourself therewith.  I tell you that you
Title:  were wrong."
Title:  
Title:  The voice of the king was tremulous with anger.  Everybody looked
Title:  and listened with astonishment, comprehending nothing of what
Title:  passed.
Title:  
Title:  "Sire," said the queen, "I can send for them to the Louvre, where
Title:  they are, and thus your Majesty's wishes will be complied with."
Title:  
Title:  "Do so, madame, do so, and that at once; for within an hour the
Title:  ballet will commence."
Title:  
Title:  The queen bent in token of submission, and followed the ladies
Title:  who were to conduct her to her room.  On his part the king
Title:  returned to his apartment.
Title:  
Title:  There was a moment of trouble and confusion in the assembly.
Title:  Everybody had remarked that something had passed between the king
Title:  and queen; but both of them had spoken so low that everybody, out
Title:  of respect, withdrew several steps, so that nobody had heard
Title:  anything.  The violins began to sound with all their might, but
Title:  nobody listened to them.
Title:  
Title:  The king came out first from his room.  He was in a most elegant
Title:  hunting costume; and Monsieur and the other nobles were dressed
Title:  like him.  This was the costume that best became the king.  So
Title:  dressed, he really appeared the first gentleman of his kingdom.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal drew near to the king, and placed in his hand a
Title:  small casket.  The king opened it, and found in it two diamond
Title:  studs.
Title:  
Title:  "What does this mean?" demanded he of the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing," replied the latter; "only, if the queen has the studs,
Title:  which I very much doubt, count them, sire, and if you only find
Title:  ten, ask her Majesty who can have stolen from her the two studs
Title:  that are here."
Title:  
Title:  The king looked at the cardinal as if to interrogate him; but he
Title:  had not time to address any question to him--a cry of admiration
Title:  burst from every mouth.  If the king appeared to be the first
Title:  gentleman of his kingdom, the queen was without doubt the most
Title:  beautiful woman in France.
Title:  
Title:  It is true that the habit of a huntress became her admirably.
Title:  She wore a beaver hat with blue feathers, a surtout of gray-pearl
Title:  velvet, fastened with diamond clasps, and a petticoat of blue
Title:  satin, embroidered with silver.  On her left shoulder sparkled
Title:  the diamond studs, on a bow of the same color as the plumes and
Title:  the petticoat.
Title:  
Title:  The king trembled with joy and the cardinal with vexation;
Title:  although, distant as they were from the queen, they could not
Title:  count the studs.  The queen had them.  The only question was, had
Title:  she ten or twelve?
Title:  
Title:  At that moment the violins sounded the signal for the ballet.
Title:  The king advanced toward Madame the President, with whom he was
Title:  to dance, and his Highness Monsieur with the queen.  They took
Title:  their places, and the ballet began.
Title:  
Title:  The king danced facing the queen, and every time he passed by
Title:  her, he devoured with his eyes those studs of which he could not
Title:  ascertain the number.  A cold sweat covered the brow of the
Title:  cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  The ballet lasted an hour, and had sixteen ENTREES.  The ballet
Title:  ended amid the applause of the whole assemblage, and everyone
Title:  reconducted his lady to her place; but the king took advantage of
Title:  the privilege he had of leaving his lady, to advance eagerly
Title:  toward the queen.
Title:  
Title:  "I thank you, madame," said he, "for the deference you have shown
Title:  to my wishes, but I think you want two of the studs, and I bring
Title:  them back to you."
Title:  
Title:  With these words he held out to the queen the two studs the
Title:  cardinal had given him.
Title:  
Title:  "How, sire?" cried the young queen, affecting surprise, "you are
Title:  giving me, then, two more:  I shall have fourteen."
Title:  
Title:  In fact the king counted them, and the twelve studs were all on
Title:  her Majesty's shoulder.
Title:  
Title:  The king called the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "What does this mean, Monsieur Cardinal?" asked the king in a
Title:  severe tone.
Title:  
Title:  "This means, sire," replied the cardinal, "that I was desirous of
Title:  presenting her Majesty with these two studs, and that not daring
Title:  to offer them myself, I adopted this means of inducing her to
Title:  accept them."
Title:  
Title:  "And I am the more grateful to your Eminence," replied Anne of
Title:  Austria, with a smile that proved she was not the dupe of this
Title:  ingenious gallantry, "from being certain that these two studs
Title:  alone have cost you as much as all the others cost his Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  Then saluting the king and the cardinal, the queen resumed her
Title:  way to the chamber in which she had dressed, and where she was to
Title:  take off her costume.
Title:  
Title:  The attention which we have been obliged to give, during the
Title:  commencement of the chapter, to the illustrious personages we
Title:  have introduced into it, has diverted us for an instant from him
Title:  to whom Anne of Austria owed the extraordinary triumph she had
Title:  obtained over the cardinal; and who, confounded, unknown, lost in
Title:  the crowd gathered at one of the doors, looked on at this scene,
Title:  comprehensible only to four persons--the king, the queen, his
Title:  Eminence, and himself.
Title:  
Title:  The queen had just regained her chamber, and d'Artagnan was about
Title:  to retire, when he felt his shoulder lightly touched.  He turned
Title:  and saw a young woman, who made him a sign to follow her.  The
Title:  face of this young woman was covered with a black velvet mask;
Title:  but notwithstanding this precaution, which was in fact taken
Title:  rather against others than against him, he at once recognized his
Title:  usual guide, the light and intelligent Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  On the evening before, they had scarcely seen each other for a
Title:  moment at the apartment of the Swiss guard, Germain, whither
Title:  d'Artagnan had sent for her.  The haste which the young woman was
Title:  in to convey to the queen the excellent news of the happy return
Title:  of her messenger prevented the two lovers from exchanging more
Title:  than a few words.  D'Artagnan therefore followed Mme. Bonacieux
Title:  moved by a double sentiment--love and curiosity.  All the way,
Title:  and in proportion as the corridors became more deserted,
Title:  d'Artagnan wished to stop the young woman, seize her and gaze
Title:  upon her, were it only for a minute; but quick as a bird she
Title:  glided between his hands, and when he wished to speak to her, her
Title:  finger placed upon her mouth, with a little imperative gesture
Title:  full of grace, reminded him that he was under the command of a
Title:  power which he must blindly obey, and which forbade him even to
Title:  make the slightest complaint.  At length, after winding about for
Title:  a minute or two, Mme. Bonacieux opened the door of a closet,
Title:  which was entirely dark, and led d'Artagnan into it.  There she
Title:  made a fresh sign of silence, and opened a second door concealed
Title:  by tapestry.  The opening of this door disclosed a brilliant
Title:  light, and she disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan remained for a moment motionless, asking himself where
Title:  he could be; but soon a ray of light which penetrated through the
Title:  chamber, together with the warm and perfumed air which reached
Title:  him from the same aperture, the conversation of two of three
Title:  ladies in language at once respectful and refined, and the word
Title:  "Majesty" several times repeated, indicated clearly that he was
Title:  in a closet attached to the queen's apartment.  The young man
Title:  waited in comparative darkness and listened.
Title:  
Title:  The queen appeared cheerful and happy, which seemed to astonish
Title:  the persons who surrounded her and who were accustomed to see her
Title:  almost always sad and full of care.  The queen attributed this
Title:  joyous feeling to the beauty of the fete, to the pleasure she had
Title:  experienced in the ballet; and as it is not permissible to
Title:  contradict a queen, whether she smile or weep, everybody
Title:  expatiated on the gallantry of the aldermen of the city of Paris.
Title:  
Title:  Although d'Artagnan did not at all know the queen, he soon
Title:  distinguished her voice from the others, at first by a slightly
Title:  foreign accent, and next by that tone of domination naturally
Title:  impressed upon all royal words.  He heard her approach and
Title:  withdraw from the partially open door; and twice or three times
Title:  he even saw the shadow of a person intercept the light.
Title:  
Title:  At length a hand and an arm, surpassingly beautiful in their form
Title:  and whiteness, glided through the tapestry.  D'Artagnan at once
Title:  comprehended that this was his recompense.  He cast himself on
Title:  his knees, seized the hand, and touched it respectfully with his
Title:  lips.  Then the hand was withdrawn, leaving in his an object
Title:  which he perceived to be a ring.  The door immediately closed,
Title:  and d'Artagnan found himself again in complete obscurity.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan placed the ring on his finger, and again waited; it
Title:  was evident that all was not yet over.  After the reward of his
Title:  devotion, that of his love was to come.  Besides, although the
Title:  ballet was danced, the evening had scarcely begun.  Supper was to
Title:  be served at three, and the clock of St. Jean had struck three
Title:  quarters past two.
Title:  
Title:  The sound of voices diminished by degrees in the adjoining
Title:  chamber.  The company was then heard departing; then the door of
Title:  the closet in which d'Artagnan was, was opened, and Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux entered.
Title:  
Title:  "You at last?" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!" said the young woman, placing her hand upon his lips;
Title:  "silence, and go the same way you came!"
Title:  
Title:  "But where and when shall I see you again?" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "A note which you will find at home will tell you.  Begone,
Title:  begone!"
Title:  
Title:  At these words she opened the door of the corridor, and pushed
Title:  d'Artagnan out of the room.  D'Artagnan obeyed like a child,
Title:  without the least resistance or objection, which proved that he
Title:  was really in love.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  23  THE RENDEZVOUS
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan ran home immediately, and although it was three
Title:  o'clock in the morning and he had some of the worst quarters of
Title:  Paris to traverse, he met with no misadventure.  Everyone knows
Title:  that drunkards and lovers have a protecting deity.
Title:  
Title:  He found the door of his passage open, sprang up the stairs and
Title:  knocked softly in a manner agreed upon between him and his
Title:  lackey.  Planchet*, whom he had sent home two hours before from
Title:  the Hotel de Ville, telling him to sit up for him, opened the
Title:  door for him.
Title:  
Title:  *The reader may ask, "How came Planchet here?" when he was left
Title:  "stiff as a rush" in London.  In the intervening time Buckingham
Title:  perhaps sent him to Paris, as he did the horses.
Title:  
Title:  "Has anyone brought a letter for me?" asked d'Artagnan, eagerly.
Title:  
Title:  "No one has BROUGHT a letter, monsieur," replied Planchet; "but
Title:  one has come of itself."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean, blockhead?"
Title:  
Title:  "I mean to say that when I came in, although I had the key of
Title:  your apartment in my pocket, and that key had never quit me, I
Title:  found a letter on the green table cover in your bedroom."
Title:  
Title:  "And where is that letter?"
Title:  
Title:  "I left it where I found it, monsieur.  It is not natural for
Title:  letters to enter people's houses in this manner.  If the window
Title:  had been open or even ajar, I should think nothing of it; but,
Title:  no--all was hermetically sealed.  Beware, monsieur; there is
Title:  certainly some magic underneath."
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, the young man had darted in to his chamber, and opened
Title:  the letter.  It was from Mme. Bonacieux, and was expressed in
Title:  these terms:
Title:  
Title:  "There are many thanks to be offered to you, and to be
Title:  transmitted to you.  Be this evening about ten o'clock at St.
Title:  Cloud, in front of the pavilion which stands at the corner of the
Title:  house of M. d'Estrees.--C.B."
Title:  
Title:  While reading this letter, d'Artagnan felt his heart dilated and
Title:  compressed by that delicious spasm which tortures and caresses
Title:  the hearts of lovers.
Title:  
Title:  It was the first billet he had received; it was the first
Title:  rendezvous that had been granted him.  His heart, swelled by the
Title:  intoxication of joy, felt ready to dissolve away at the very gate
Title:  of that terrestrial paradise called Love!
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monsieur," said Planchet, who had observed his master grow
Title:  red and pale successively, "did I not guess truly?  Is it not
Title:  some bad affair?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are mistaken, Planchet," replied d'Artagnan; "and as a
Title:  proof, there is a crown to drink my health."
Title:  
Title:  "I am much obliged to Monsieur for the crown he had given me, and
Title:  I promise him to follow his instructions exactly; but it is not
Title:  the less true that letters which come in this way into shut-up
Title:  houses--"
Title:  
Title:  "Fall from heaven, my friend, fall from heaven."
Title:  
Title:  "Then Monsieur is satisfied?" asked Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Planchet, I am the happiest of men!"
Title:  
Title:  "And I may profit by Monsieur's happiness, and go to bed?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, go."
Title:  
Title:  "May the blessings of heaven fall upon Monsieur!  But it is not
Title:  the less true that that letter--"
Title:  
Title:  And Planchet retired, shaking his head with an air of doubt,
Title:  which the liberality of d'Artagnan had not entirely effaced.
Title:  
Title:  Left alone, d'Artagnan read and reread his billet.  Then he
Title:  kissed and rekissed twenty times the lines traced by the hand of
Title:  his beautiful mistress.  At length he went to bed, fell asleep,
Title:  and had golden dreams.
Title:  
Title:  At seven o'clock in the morning he arose and called Planchet, who
Title:  at the second summons opened the door, his countenance not yet
Title:  quite freed from the anxiety of the preceding night.
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet," said d'Artagnan, "I am going out for all day,
Title:  perhaps.  You are, therefore, your own master till seven o'clock
Title:  in the evening; but at seven o'clock you must hold yourself in
Title:  readiness with two horses."
Title:  
Title:  "There!" said Planchet.  "We are going again, it appears, to have
Title:  our hides pierced in all sorts of ways."
Title:  
Title:  "You will take your musketoon and your pistols."
Title:  
Title:  "There, now!  Didn't I say so?" cried Planchet.  "I was sure of
Title:  it--the cursed letter!"
Title:  
Title:  "Don't be afraid, you idiot; there is nothing in hand but a party
Title:  of pleasure."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, like the charming journey the other day, when it rained
Title:  bullets and produced a crop of steel traps!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, if you are really afraid, Monsieur Planchet," resumed
Title:  d'Artagnan, "I will go without you.  I prefer traveling alone to
Title:  having a companion who entertains the least fear."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur does me wrong," said Planchet; "I thought he had seen
Title:  me at work."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but I thought perhaps you had worn out all your courage the
Title:  first time."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur shall see that upon occasion I have some left; only I
Title:  beg Monsieur not to be too prodigal of it if he wishes it to last
Title:  long."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you believe you have still a certain amount of it to expend
Title:  this evening?"
Title:  
Title:  "I hope so, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, I count on you."
Title:  
Title:  "At the appointed hour I shall be ready; only I believed that
Title:  Monsieur had but one horse in the Guard stables."
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps there is but one at this moment; but by this evening
Title:  there will be four."
Title:  
Title:  "It appears that our journey was a remounting journey, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly so," said d'Artagnan; and nodding to Planchet, he went
Title:  out.
Title:  
Title:  M. Bonacieux was at his door.  D'Artagnan's intention was to go
Title:  out without speaking to the worthy mercer; but the latter made so
Title:  polite and friendly a salutation that his tenant felt obliged,
Title:  not only to stop, but to enter into conversation with him.
Title:  
Title:  Besides, how is it possible to avoid a little condescension
Title:  toward a husband whose pretty wife has appointed a meeting with
Title:  you that same evening at St. Cloud, opposite D'Estrees's
Title:  pavilion?  D'Artagnan approached him with the most amiable air he
Title:  could assume.
Title:  
Title:  The conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of the
Title:  poor man.  M. Bonacieux, who was ignorant that d'Artagnan had
Title:  overheard his conversation with the stranger of Meung, related to
Title:  his young tenant the persecutions of that monster, M. de
Title:  Laffemas, whom he never ceased to designate, during his account,
Title:  by the title of the "cardinal's executioner," and expatiated at
Title:  great length upon the Bastille, the bolts, the wickets, the
Title:  dungeons, the gratings, the instruments of torture.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan listened to him with exemplary complaisance, and when
Title:  he had finished said, "And Madame Bonacieux, do you know who
Title:  carried her off?--For I do not forget that I owe to that
Title:  unpleasant circumstance the good fortune of having made your
Title:  acquaintance."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!" said Bonacieux, "they took good care not to tell me that;
Title:  and my wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that's sacred
Title:  that she does not know.  But you," continued M. Bonacieux, in a
Title:  tine of perfect good fellowship, "what has become of you all
Title:  these days?  I have not seen you nor your friends, and I don't
Title:  think you could gather all that dust that I saw Planchet brush
Title:  off your boots yesterday from the pavement of Paris."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, my friends and I have
Title:  been on a little journey."
Title:  
Title:  "Far from here?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, Lord, no!  About forty leagues only.  We went to take
Title:  Monsieur Athos to the waters of Forges, where my friends still
Title:  remain."
Title:  
Title:  "And you have returned, have you not?" replied M. Bonacieux,
Title:  giving to his countenance a most sly air.  "A handsome young
Title:  fellow like you does not obtain long leaves of absence from his
Title:  mistress; and we were impatiently waited for at Paris, were we
Title:  not?"
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!" said the young man, laughing, "I confess it, and so
Title:  much more the readily, my dear Bonacieux, as I see there is no
Title:  concealing anything from you.  Yes, I was expected, and very
Title:  impatiently, I acknowledge."
Title:  
Title:  A slight shade passed over the brow of Bonacieux, but so slight
Title:  that d'Artagnan did not perceive it.
Title:  
Title:  "And we are going to be recompensed for our diligence?" continued
Title:  the mercer, with a trifling alteration in his voice--so trifling,
Title:  indeed, that d'Artagnan did not perceive it any more than he had
Title:  the momentary shade which, an instant before, had darkened the
Title:  countenance of the worthy man.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, may you be a true prophet!" said d'Artagnan, laughing.
Title:  
Title:  "No; what I say," replied Bonacieux, "is only that I may know
Title:  whether I am delaying you."
Title:  
Title:  "Why that question, my dear host?" asked d'Artagnan.  "Do you
Title:  intend to sit up for me?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; but since my arrest and the robbery that was committed in my
Title:  house, I am alarmed every time I hear a door open, particularly
Title:  in the night.  What the deuce can you expect?  I am no
Title:  swordsman."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, don't be alarmed if I return at one, two or three o'clock
Title:  in the morning; indeed, do not be alarmed if I do not come at
Title:  all."
Title:  
Title:  This time Bonacieux became so pale that d'Artagnan could not help
Title:  perceiving it, and asked him what was the matter.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing," replied Bonacieux, "nothing.  Since my misfortunes I
Title:  have been subject to faintnesses, which seize me all at once, and
Title:  I have just felt a cold shiver.  Pay no attention to it; you have
Title:  nothing to occupy yourself with but being happy."
Title:  
Title:  "Then I have full occupation, for I am so."
Title:  
Title:  "Not yet; wait a little!  This evening, you said."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, this evening will come, thank God!  And perhaps you look
Title:  for it with as much impatience as I do; perhaps this evening
Title:  Madame Bonacieux will visit the conjugal domicile."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame Bonacieux is not at liberty this evening," replied the
Title:  husband, seriously; "she is detained at the Louvre this evening
Title:  by her duties."
Title:  
Title:  "So much the worse for you, my dear host, so much the worse!
Title:  When I am happy, I wish all the world to be so; but it appears
Title:  that is not possible."
Title:  
Title:  The young man departed, laughing at the joke, which he thought he
Title:  alone could comprehend.
Title:  
Title:  "Amuse yourself well!" replied Bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan was too far off to hear him; and if he had heard
Title:  him in the disposition of mind he then enjoyed, he certainly
Title:  would not have remarked it.
Title:  
Title:  He took his way toward the hotel of M. de Treville; his visit of
Title:  the day before, it is to be remembered, had been very short and
Title:  very little explicative.
Title:  
Title:  He found Treville in a joyful mood.  He had thought the king and
Title:  queen charming at the ball.  It is true the cardinal had been
Title:  particularly ill-tempered.  He had retired at one o'clock under
Title:  the pretense of being indisposed.  As to their Majesties, they
Title:  did not return to the Louvre till six o'clock in the morning.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said Treville, lowering his voice, and looking into every
Title:  corner of the apartment to see if they were alone, "now let us
Title:  talk about yourself, my young friend; for it is evident that your
Title:  happy return has something to do with the joy of the king, the
Title:  triumph of the queen, and the humiliation of his Eminence.  You
Title:  must look out for yourself."
Title:  
Title:  "What have I to fear," replied d'Artagnan, "as long as I shall
Title:  have the luck to enjoy the favor of their Majesties?"
Title:  
Title:  "Everything, believe me.  The cardinal is not the man to forget a
Title:  mystification until he has settled account with the mystifier;
Title:  and the mystifier appears to me to have the air of being a
Title:  certain young Gascon of my acquaintance."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself,
Title:  and knows that I have been to London?"
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  You have been to London!  Was it from London you
Title:  brought that beautiful diamond that glitters on your finger?
Title:  Beware, my dear d'Artagnan!  A present from an enemy is not a
Title:  good thing.  Are there not some Latin verses upon that subject?
Title:  Stop!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, doubtless," replied d'Artagnan, who had never been able to
Title:  cram the first rudiments of that language into his head, and who
Title:  had by his ignorance driven his master to despair, "yes,
Title:  doubtless there is one."
Title:  
Title:  "There certainly is one," said M. de Treville, who had a tincture
Title:  of literature, "and Monsieur de Benserade was quoting it to me
Title:  the other day.  Stop a minute--ah, this is it:  'Timeo Danaos et
Title:  dona ferentes,' which means, 'Beware of the enemy who makes you
Title:  presents."
Title:  
Title:  "This diamond does not come from an enemy, monsieur," replied
Title:  d'Artagnan, "it comes from the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "From the queen! Oh, oh!" said M. de Treville.  "Why, it is
Title:  indeed a true royal jewel, which is worth a thousand pistoles if
Title:  it is worth a denier.  By whom did the queen send you this
Title:  jewel?"
Title:  
Title:  "She gave it to me herself."
Title:  
Title:  "Where?"
Title:  
Title:  "In the room adjoining the chamber in which she changed her
Title:  toilet."
Title:  
Title:  "How?"
Title:  
Title:  "Giving me her hand to kiss."
Title:  
Title:  "You have kissed the queen's hand?" said M. de Treville, looking
Title:  earnestly at d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Her Majesty did me the honor to grant me that favor."
Title:  
Title:  "And that in the presence of witnesses!  Imprudent, thrice
Title:  imprudent!"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur, be satisfied; nobody saw her," replied d'Artagnan,
Title:  and he related to M. de Treville how the affair came to pass.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, the women, the women!" cried the old soldier.  "I know them
Title:  by their romantic imagination.  Everything that savors of mystery
Title:  charms them.  So you have seen the arm, that was all.  You would
Title:  meet the queen, and she would not know who you are?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; but thanks to this diamond," replied the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen," said M. de Treville; "shall I give you counsel, good
Title:  counsel, the counsel of a friend?"
Title:  
Title:  "You will do me honor, monsieur," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, off to the nearest goldsmith's, and sell that
Title:  diamond for the highest price you can get from him.  However much
Title:  of a Jew he may be, he will give you at least eight hundred
Title:  pistoles.  Pistoles have no name, young man, and that ring has a
Title:  terrible one, which may betray him who wears it."
Title:  
Title:  "Sell this ring, a ring which comes from my sovereign?  Never!"
Title:  said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Then, at least turn the gem inside, you silly fellow; for
Title:  everybody must be aware that a cadet from Gascony does not find
Title:  such stones in his mother's jewel case."
Title:  
Title:  "You think, then, I have something to dread?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I mean to say, young man, that he who sleeps over a mine the
Title:  match of which is already lighted, may consider himself in safety
Title:  in comparison with you."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" said d'Artagnan, whom the positive tone of M. de
Title:  Treville began to disquiet, "the devil!  What must I do?"
Title:  
Title:  "Above all things be always on your guard.  The cardinal has a
Title:  tenacious memory and a long arm; you may depend upon it, he will
Title:  repay you by some ill turn."
Title:  
Title:  "But of what sort?"
Title:  
Title:  "Eh!  How can I tell?  Has he not all the tricks of a demon at
Title:  his command?  The least that can be expected is that you will be
Title:  arrested."
Title:  
Title:  "What!  Will they dare to arrest a man in his Majesty's service?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU!  They did not scruple much in the case of Athos.  At
Title:  all events, young man, rely upon one who has been thirty years at
Title:  court.  Do not lull yourself in security, or you will be lost;
Title:  but, on the contrary--and it is I who say it--see enemies in all
Title:  directions.  If anyone seeks a quarrel with you, shun it, were it
Title:  with a child of ten years old.  If you are attacked by day or by
Title:  night, fight, but retreat, without shame; if you cross a bridge,
Title:  feel every plank of it with your foot, lest one should give way
Title:  beneath you; if you pass before a house which is being built,
Title:  look up, for fear a stone should fall upon your head; if you stay
Title:  out late, be always followed by your lackey, and let your lackey
Title:  be armed--if, by the by, you can be sure of your lackey.
Title:  Mistrust everybody, your friend, your brother, your mistress--
Title:  your mistress above all."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan blushed.
Title:  
Title:  "My mistress above all," repeated he, mechanically; "and why her
Title:  rather than another?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because a mistress is one of the cardinal's favorite means; he
Title:  has not one that is more expeditious.  A woman will sell you for
Title:  ten pistoles, witness Delilah.  You are acquainted with the
Title:  Scriptures?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan thought of the appointment Mme. Bonacieux had made
Title:  with him for that very evening; but we are bound to say, to the
Title:  credit of our hero, that the bad opinion entertained by M. de
Title:  Treville of women in general, did not inspire him with the least
Title:  suspicion of his pretty hostess.
Title:  
Title:  "But, A PROPOS," resumed M. de Treville, "what has become of your
Title:  three companions?"
Title:  
Title:  "I was about to ask you if you had heard any news of them?"
Title:  
Title:  "None, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I left them on my road--Porthos at Chantilly, with a duel
Title:  on his hands; Aramis at Crevecoeur, with a ball in his shoulder;
Title:  and Athos at Amiens, detained by an accusation of coining."
Title:  
Title:  "See there, now!" said M. de Treville; "and how the devil did you
Title:  escape?"
Title:  
Title:  "By a miracle, monsieur, I must acknowledge, with a sword thrust
Title:  in my breast, and by nailing the Comte de Wardes on the byroad to
Title:  Calais, like a butterfly on a tapestry."
Title:  
Title:  "There again!  De Wardes, one of the cardinal's men, a cousin of
Title:  Rochefort!  Stop, my friend, I have an idea."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "In your place, I would do one thing."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "While his Eminence was seeking for me in Paris, I would take,
Title:  without sound of drum or trumpet, the road to Picardy, and would
Title:  go and make some inquiries concerning my three companions.  What
Title:  the devil!  They merit richly that piece of attention on your
Title:  part."
Title:  
Title:  "The advice is good, monsieur, and tomorrow I will set out."
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow!  Any why not this evening?"
Title:  
Title:  "This evening, monsieur, I am detained in Paris by indispensable
Title:  business."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, young man, young man, some flirtation or other.  Take care,
Title:  I repeat to you, take care.  It is woman who has ruined us, still
Title:  ruins us, and will ruin us, as long as the world stands.  Take my
Title:  advice and set out this evening."
Title:  
Title:  "Impossible, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "You have given your word, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, that's quite another thing; but promise me, if you should
Title:  not be killed tonight, that you will go tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  "I promise it."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you need money?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have still fifty pistoles.  That, I think, is as much as I
Title:  shall want."
Title:  
Title:  "But your companions?"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't think they can be in need of any.  We left Paris, each
Title:  with seventy-five pistoles in his pocket."
Title:  
Title:  "Shall I see you again before your departure?"
Title:  
Title:  "I think not, monsieur, unless something new should happen."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, a pleasant journey."
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan left M. de Treville, touched more than ever by his
Title:  paternal solicitude for his Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  He called successively at the abodes of Athos, Porthos, and
Title:  Aramis.  Neither of them had returned.  Their lackeys likewise
Title:  were absent, and nothing had been heard of either the one or the
Title:  other.  He would have inquired after them of their mistresses,
Title:  but he was neither acquainted with Porthos's nor Aramis's, and as
Title:  to Athos, he had none.
Title:  
Title:  As he passed the Hotel des Gardes, he took a glance in to the
Title:  stables.  Three of the four horses had already arrived.
Title:  Planchet, all astonishment, was busy grooming them, and had
Title:  already finished two.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, on perceiving d'Artagnan, "how
Title:  glad I am to see you."
Title:  
Title:  "Why so, Planchet?" asked the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you place confidence in our landlord--Monsieur Bonacieux?"
Title:  
Title:  "I?  Not the least in the world."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you do quite right, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "But why this question?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because, while you were talking with him, I watched you without
Title:  listening to you; and, monsieur, his countenance changed color
Title:  two or three times!"
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!"
Title:  
Title:  "Preoccupied as Monsieur was with the letter he had received, he
Title:  did not observe that; but I, whom the strange fashion in which
Title:  that letter came into the house had placed on my guard--I did not
Title:  lose a movement of his features."
Title:  
Title:  "And you found it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Traitorous, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  "Still more; as soon as Monsieur had left and disappeared round
Title:  the corner of the street, Monsieur Bonacieux took his hat, shut
Title:  his door, and set off at a quick pace in an opposite direction."
Title:  
Title:  "It seems you are right, Planchet; all this appears to be a
Title:  little mysterious; and be assured that we will not pay him our
Title:  rent until the matter shall be categorically explained to us."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur jests, but Monsieur will see."
Title:  
Title:  "What would you have, Planchet?  What must come is written."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening?"
Title:  
Title:  "Quite the contrary, Planchet; the more ill will I have toward
Title:  Monsieur Bonacieux, the more punctual I shall be in keeping the
Title:  appointment made by that letter which makes you so uneasy."
Title:  
Title:  "Then that is Monsieur's determination?"
Title:  
Title:  "Undeniably, my friend.  At nine o'clock, then, be ready here at
Title:  the hotel, I will come and take you."
Title:  
Title:  Planchet seeing there was no longer any hope of making his master
Title:  renounce his project, heaved a profound sigh and set to work to
Title:  groom the third horse.
Title:  
Title:  As to d'Artagnan, being at bottom a prudent youth, instead of
Title:  returning home, went and dined with the Gascon priest, who, at
Title:  the time of the distress of the four friends, had given them a
Title:  breakfast of chocolate.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  24 THE PAVILION
Title:  
Title:  At nine o'clock d'Artagnan was at the Hotel des Gardes; he found
Title:  Planchet all ready.  The fourth horse had arrived.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet was armed with his musketoon and a pistol.  D'Artagnan
Title:  had his sword and placed two pistols in his belt; then both
Title:  mounted and departed quietly.  It was quite dark, and no one saw
Title:  them go out.  Planchet took place behind his master, and kept at
Title:  a distance of ten paces from him.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan crossed the quays, went out by the gate of La
Title:  Conference and followed the road, much more beautiful then than
Title:  it is now, which leads to St. Cloud.
Title:  
Title:  As long as he was in the city, Planchet kept at the respectful
Title:  distance he had imposed upon himself; but as soon as the road
Title:  began to be more lonely and dark, he drew softly nearer, so that
Title:  when they entered the Bois de Boulogne he found himself riding
Title:  quite naturally side by side with his master.  In fact, we must
Title:  not dissemble that the oscillation of the tall trees and the
Title:  reflection of the moon in the dark underwood gave him serious
Title:  uneasiness.  D'Artagnan could not help perceiving that something
Title:  more than usual was passing in the mind of his lackey and said,
Title:  "Well, Monsieur Planchet, what is the matter with us now?"
Title:  
Title:  "Don't you think, monsieur, that woods are like churches?"
Title:  
Title:  "How so, Planchet?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because we dare not speak aloud in one or the other."
Title:  
Title:  "But why did you not dare to speak aloud, Planchet--because you
Title:  are afraid?"
Title:  
Title:  "Afraid of being heard?  Yes, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Afraid of being heard!  Why, there is nothing improper in our
Title:  conversation, my dear Planchet, and no one could find fault with
Title:  it."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur!" replied Planchet, recurring to his besetting
Title:  idea, "that Monsieur Bonacieux has something vicious in his
Title:  eyebrows, and something very unpleasant in the play of his lips."
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil makes you think of Bonacieux?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, we think of what we can, and not of what we will."
Title:  
Title:  "Because you are a coward, Planchet."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, we must not confound prudence with cowardice; prudence
Title:  is a virtue."
Title:  
Title:  "And you are very virtuous, are you not, Planchet?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, is not that the barrel of a musket which glitters
Title:  yonder?  Had we not better lower our heads?"
Title:  
Title:  "In truth," murmured d'Artagnan, to whom M. de Treville's
Title:  recommendation recurred, "this animal will end by making me
Title:  afraid."  And he put his horse into a trot.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet followed the movements of his master as if he had been
Title:  his shadow, and was soon trotting by his side.
Title:  
Title:  "Are we going to continue this pace all night?" asked Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  "No; you are at your journey's end."
Title:  
Title:  "How, monsieur!  And you?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am going a few steps farther."
Title:  
Title:  "And Monsieur leaves me here alone?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are afraid, Planchet?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; I only beg leave to observe to Monsieur that the night will
Title:  be very cold, that chills bring on rheumatism, and that a lackey
Title:  who has the rheumatism makes but a poor servant, particularly to
Title:  a master as active as Monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, if you are cold, Planchet, you can go into one of those
Title:  cabarets that you see yonder, and be in waiting for me at the
Title:  door by six o'clock in the morning."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, I have eaten and drunk respectfully the crown you gave
Title:  me this morning, so that I have not a sou left in case I should
Title:  be cold."
Title:  
Title:  "Here's half a pistole.  Tomorrow morning."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan sprang from his horse, threw the bridle to Planchet,
Title:  and departed at a quick pace, folding his cloak around him.
Title:  
Title:  "Good Lord, how cold I am!" cried Planchet, as soon as he had
Title:  lost sight of his master; and in such haste was he to warm
Title:  himself that he went straight to a house set out with all the
Title:  attributes of a suburban tavern, and knocked at the door.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime d'Artagnan, who had plunged into a bypath,
Title:  continued his route and reached St. Cloud; but instead of
Title:  following the main street he turned behind the chateau, reached a
Title:  sort of retired lane, and found himself soon in front of the
Title:  pavilion named.  It was situated in a very private spot.  A high
Title:  wall, at the angle of which was the pavilion, ran along one side
Title:  of this lane, and on the other was a little garden connected with
Title:  a poor cottage which was protected by a hedge from passers-by.
Title:  
Title:  He gained the place appointed, and as no signal had been given
Title:  him by which to announce his presence, he waited.
Title:  
Title:  Not the least noise was to be heard; it might be imagined that he
Title:  was a hundred miles from the capital.  D'Artagnan leaned against
Title:  the hedge, after having cast a glance behind it.  Beyond that
Title:  hedge, that garden, and that cottage, a dark mist enveloped with
Title:  its folds that immensity where Paris slept--a vast void from
Title:  which glittered a few luminous points, the funeral stars of that
Title:  hell!
Title:  
Title:  But for d'Artagnan all aspects were clothed happily, all ideas
Title:  wore a smile, all shades were diaphanous.  The appointed hour was
Title:  about to strike.  In fact, at the end of a few minutes the belfry
Title:  of St. Cloud let fall slowly ten strokes from its sonorous jaws.
Title:  There was something melancholy in this brazen voice pouring out
Title:  its lamentations in the middle of the night; but each of those
Title:  strokes, which made up the expected hour, vibrated harmoniously
Title:  to the heart of the young man.
Title:  
Title:  His eyes were fixed upon the little pavilion situated at the
Title:  angle of the wall, of which all the windows were closed with
Title:  shutters, except one on the first story.  Through this window
Title:  shone a mild light which silvered the foliage of two or three
Title:  linden trees which formed a group outside the park.  There could
Title:  be no doubt that behind this little window, which threw forth
Title:  such friendly beams, the pretty Mme. Bonacieux expected him.
Title:  
Title:  Wrapped in this sweet idea, d'Artagnan waited half an hour
Title:  without the least impatience, his eyes fixed upon that charming
Title:  little abode of which he could perceive a part of the ceiling
Title:  with its gilded moldings, attesting the elegance of the rest of
Title:  the apartment.
Title:  
Title:  The belfry of St. Cloud sounded half past ten.
Title:  
Title:  This time, without knowing why, d'Artagnan felt a cold shiver run
Title:  through his veins.  Perhaps the cold began to affect him, and he
Title:  took a perfectly physical sensation for a moral impression.
Title:  
Title:  Then the idea seized him that he had read incorrectly, and that
Title:  the appointment was for eleven o'clock.  He drew near to the
Title:  window, and placing himself so that a ray of light should fall
Title:  upon the letter as he held it, he drew it from his pocket and
Title:  read it again; but he had not been mistaken, the appointment was
Title:  for ten o'clock.  He went and resumed his post, beginning to be
Title:  rather uneasy at this silence and this solitude.
Title:  
Title:  Eleven o'clock sounded.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan began now really to fear that something had happened
Title:  to Mme. Bonacieux.  He clapped his hands three times--the
Title:  ordinary signal of lovers; but nobody replied to him, not even an
Title:  echo.
Title:  
Title:  He then thought, with a touch of vexation, that perhaps the young
Title:  woman had fallen asleep while waiting for him.  He approached the
Title:  wall, and tried to climb it; but the wall had been recently
Title:  pointed, and d'Artagnan could get no hold.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment he thought of the trees, upon whose leaves the
Title:  light still shone; and as one of them drooped over the road, he
Title:  thought that from its branches he might get a glimpse of the
Title:  interior of the pavilion.
Title:  
Title:  The tree was easy to climb.  Besides, d'Artagnan was but twenty
Title:  years old, and consequently had not yet forgotten his schoolboy
Title:  habits.  In an instant he was among the branches, and his keen
Title:  eyes plunged through the transparent panes into the interior of
Title:  the pavilion.
Title:  
Title:  It was a strange thing, and one which made d'Artagnan tremble
Title:  from the sole of his foot to the roots of his hair, to find that
Title:  this soft light, this calm lamp, enlightened a scene of fearful
Title:  disorder.  One of the windows was broken, the door of the chamber
Title:  had been beaten in and hung, split in two, on its hinges.  A
Title:  table, which had been covered with an elegant supper, was
Title:  overturned.  The decanters broken in pieces, and the fruits
Title:  crushed, strewed the floor.  Everything in the apartment gave
Title:  evidence of a violent and desperate struggle.  D'Artagnan even
Title:  fancied he could recognize amid this strange disorder, fragments
Title:  of garments, and some bloody spots staining the cloth and the
Title:  curtains.  He hastened to descend into the street, with a
Title:  frightful beating at his heart; he wished to see if he could find
Title:  other traces of violence.
Title:  
Title:  The little soft light shone on in the calmness of the night.
Title:  d'Artagnan then perceived a thing that he had not before
Title:  remarked--for nothing had led him to the examination--that the
Title:  ground, trampled here and hoofmarked there, presented confused
Title:  traces of men and horses.  Besides, the wheels of a carriage,
Title:  which appeared to have come from Paris, had made a deep
Title:  impression in the soft earth, which did not extend beyond the
Title:  pavilion, but turned again toward Paris.
Title:  
Title:  At length d'Artagnan, in pursuing his researches, found near the
Title:  wall a woman's torn glove.  This glove, wherever it had not
Title:  touched the muddy ground, was of irreproachable odor.  It was one
Title:  of those perfumed gloves that lovers like to snatch from a pretty
Title:  hand.
Title:  
Title:  As d'Artagnan pursued his investigations, a more abundant and
Title:  more icy sweat rolled in large drops from his forehead; his heart
Title:  was oppressed by a horrible anguish; his respiration was broken
Title:  and short.  And yet he said, to reassure himself, that this
Title:  pavilion perhaps had nothing in common with Mme. Bonacieux; that
Title:  the young woman had made an appointment with him before the
Title:  pavilion, and not in the pavilion; that she might have been
Title:  detained in Paris by her duties, or perhaps by the jealousy of
Title:  her husband.
Title:  
Title:  But all these reasons were combated, destroyed, overthrown, by
Title:  that feeling of intimate pain which, on certain occasions, takes
Title:  possession of our being, and cries to us so as to be understood
Title:  unmistakably that some great misfortune is hanging over us.
Title:  
Title:  Then d'Artagnan became almost wild.  He ran along the high road,
Title:  took the path he had before taken, and reaching the ferry,
Title:  interrogated the boatman.
Title:  
Title:  About seven o'clock in the evening, the boatman had taken over a
Title:  young woman, wrapped in a black mantle, who appeared to be very
Title:  anxious not to be recognized; but entirely on account of her
Title:  precautions, the boatman had paid more attention to her and
Title:  discovered that she was young and pretty.
Title:  
Title:  There were then, as now, a crowd of young and pretty women who
Title:  came to St. Cloud, and who had reasons for not being seen, and
Title:  yet d'Artagnan did not for an instant doubt that it was Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux whom the boatman had noticed.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took advantage of the lamp which burned in the cabin
Title:  of the ferryman to read the billet of Mme. Bonacieux once again,
Title:  and satisfy himself that he had not been mistaken, that the
Title:  appointment was at St. Cloud and not elsewhere, before the
Title:  D'Estrees's pavilion and not in another street.  Everything
Title:  conspired to prove to d'Artagnan that his presentiments had not
Title:  deceived him, and that a great misfortune had happened.
Title:  
Title:  He again ran back to the chateau.  It appeared to him that
Title:  something might have happened at the pavilion in his absence, and
Title:  that fresh information awaited him.  The lane was still deserted,
Title:  and the same calm soft light shone through the window.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan then thought of that cottage, silent and obscure,
Title:  which had no doubt seen all, and could tell its tale.  The gate
Title:  of the enclosure was shut; but he leaped over the hedge, and in
Title:  spite of the barking of a chained-up dog, went up to the cabin.
Title:  
Title:  No one answered to his first knocking.  A silence of death
Title:  reigned in the cabin as in the pavilion; but as the cabin was his
Title:  last resource, he knocked again.
Title:  
Title:  It soon appeared to him that he heard a slight noise within--a
Title:  timid noise which seemed to tremble lest it should be heard.
Title:  
Title:  Then d'Artagnan ceased knocking, and prayed with an accent so
Title:  full of anxiety and promises, terror and cajolery, that his voice
Title:  was of a nature to reassure the most fearful.  At length an old,
Title:  worm-eaten shutter was opened, or rather pushed ajar, but closed
Title:  again as soon as the light from a miserable lamp which burned in
Title:  the corner had shone upon the baldric, sword belt, and pistol
Title:  pommels of d'Artagnan.  Nevertheless, rapid as the movement had
Title:  been, d'Artagnan had had time to get a glimpse of the head of an
Title:  old man.
Title:  
Title:  "In the name of heaven!" cried he, "listen to me; I have been
Title:  waiting for someone who has not come.  I am dying with anxiety.
Title:  Has anything particular happened in the neighborhood?  Speak!"
Title:  
Title:  The window was again opened slowly, and the same face appeared,
Title:  only it was now still more pale than before.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan related his story simply, with the omission of names.
Title:  He told how he had a rendezvous with a young woman before that
Title:  pavilion, and how, not seeing her come, he had climbed the linden
Title:  tree, and by the light of the lamp had seen the disorder of the
Title:  chamber.
Title:  
Title:  The old man listened attentively, making a sign only that it was
Title:  all so; and then, when d'Artagnan had ended, he shook his head
Title:  with an air that announced nothing good.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean?" cried d'Artagnan.  "In the name of heaven,
Title:  explain yourself!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!  Monsieur," said the old man, "ask me nothing; for if I
Title:  dared tell you what I have seen, certainly no good would befall
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "You have, then, seen something?" replied d'Artagnan.  "In that
Title:  case, in the name of heaven," continued he, throwing him a
Title:  pistole, "tell me what you have seen, and I will pledge you the
Title:  word of a gentleman that not one of your words shall escape from
Title:  my heart."
Title:  
Title:  The old man read so much truth and so much grief in the face of
Title:  the young man that he made him a sign to listen, and repeated in
Title:  a low voice: "It was scarcely nine o'clock when I heard a noise
Title:  in the street, and was wondering what it could be, when on coming
Title:  to my door, I found that somebody was endeavoring to open it.  As
Title:  I am very poor and am not afraid of being robbed, I went and
Title:  opened the gate and saw three men at a few paces from it.  In the
Title:  shadow was a carriage with two horses, and some saddlehorses.
Title:  These horses evidently belonged to the three men, who were dressed
Title:  as cavaliers.  'Ah, my worthy gentlemen,' cried I, 'what do you
Title:  want?'  'You must have a ladder?' said he who appeared to be the
Title:  leader of the party.  'Yes, monsieur, the one with which I gather
Title:  my fruit.'  'Lend it to us, and go into your house again; there
Title:  is a crown for the annoyance we have caused you.  Only remember
Title:  this--if you speak a word of what you may see or what you may
Title:  hear (for you will look and you will listen, I am quite sure,
Title:  however we may threaten you), you are lost.'  At these words he
Title:  threw me a crown, which I picked up, and he took the ladder.
Title:  After shutting the gate behind them, I pretended to return to the
Title:  house, but I immediately went out a back door, and stealing along
Title:  in the shade of the hedge, I gained yonder clump of elder, from
Title:  which I could hear and see everything.  The three men brought the
Title:  carriage up quietly, and took out of it a little man, stout,
Title:  short, elderly, and commonly dressed in clothes of a dark color,
Title:  who ascended the ladder very carefully, looked suspiciously in at
Title:  the window of the pavilion, came down as quietly as he had gone
Title:  up, and whispered, 'It is she!'  Immediately, he who had spoken
Title:  to me approached the door of the pavilion, opened it with a key
Title:  he had in his hand, closed the door and disappeared, while at the
Title:  same time the other two men ascended the ladder.  The little old
Title:  man remained at the coach door; the coachman took care of his
Title:  horses, the lackey held the saddlehorses.  All at once great
Title:  cries resounded in the pavilion, and a woman came to the window,
Title:  and opened it, as if to throw herself out of it; but as soon as
Title:  she perceived the other two men, she fell back and they went into
Title:  the chamber.  Then I saw no more; but I heard the noise of
Title:  breaking furniture.  The woman screamed, and cried for help; but
Title:  her cries were soon stifled.  Two of the men appeared, bearing
Title:  the woman in their arms, and carried her to the carriage, into
Title:  which the little old man got after her.  The leader closed the
Title:  window, came out an instant after by the door, and satisfied
Title:  himself that the woman was in the carriage.  His two companions
Title:  were already on horseback.  He sprang into his saddle; the lackey
Title:  took his place by the coachman; the carriage went off at a quick
Title:  pace, escorted by the three horsemen, and all was over.  From
Title:  that moment I have neither seen nor heard anything."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, entirely overcome by this terrible story, remained
Title:  motionless and mute, while all the demons of anger and jealousy
Title:  were howling in his heart.
Title:  
Title:  "But, my good gentleman," resumed the old man, upon whom this
Title:  mute despair certainly produced a greater effect than cries and
Title:  tears would have done, "do not take on so; they did not kill her,
Title:  and that's a comfort."
Title:  
Title:  "Can you guess," said d'Artagnan, "who was the man who headed
Title:  this infernal expedition?"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know him."
Title:  
Title:  "But as you spoke to him you must have seen him."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, it's a description you want?"
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly so."
Title:  
Title:  "A tall, dark man, with black mustaches, dark eyes, and the air
Title:  of a gentleman."
Title:  
Title:  "That's the man!" cried d'Artagnan, "again he, forever he!  He is
Title:  my demon, apparently.  And the other?"
Title:  
Title:  "Which?"
Title:  
Title:  "The short one."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, he was not a gentleman, I'll answer for it; besides, he did
Title:  not wear a sword, and the others treated him with small
Title:  consideration."
Title:  
Title:  "Some lackey," murmured d'Artagnan.  "Poor woman, poor woman,
Title:  what have they done with you?"
Title:  
Title:  "You have promised to be secret, my good monsieur?" said the old
Title:  man.
Title:  
Title:  "And I renew my promise.  Be easy, I am a gentleman.  A gentleman
Title:  has but his word, and I have given you mine."
Title:  
Title:  With a heavy heart, d'Artagnan again bent his way toward the
Title:  ferry.  Sometimes he hoped it could not be Mme. Bonacieux, and
Title:  that he should find her next day at the Louvre; sometimes he
Title:  feared she had had an intrigue with another, who, in a jealous
Title:  fit, had surprised her and carried her off.  His mind was torn by
Title:  doubt, grief, and despair.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, if I had my three friends here," cried he, "I should have,
Title:  at least, some hopes of finding her; but who knows what has
Title:  become of them?"
Title:  
Title:  It was past midnight; the next thing was to find Planchet.
Title:  d'Artagnan went successively into all the cabarets in which there
Title:  was a light, but could not find Planchet in any of them.
Title:  
Title:  At the sixth he began to reflect that the search was rather
Title:  dubious.  D'Artagnan had appointed six o'clock in the morning for
Title:  his lackey, and wherever he might be, he was right.
Title:  
Title:  Besides, it came into the young man's mind that by remaining in
Title:  the environs of the spot on which this sad event had passed, he
Title:  would, perhaps, have some light thrown upon the mysterious
Title:  affair.  At the sixth cabaret, then, as we said, d'Artagnan
Title:  stopped, asked for a bottle of wine of the best quality, and
Title:  placing himself in the darkest corner of the room, determined
Title:  thus to wait till daylight; but this time again his hopes were
Title:  disappointed, and although he listened with all his ears, he
Title:  heard nothing, amid the oaths, coarse jokes, and abuse which
Title:  passed between the laborers, servants, and carters who comprised
Title:  the honorable society of which he formed a part, which could put
Title:  him upon the least track of her who had been stolen from him.  He
Title:  was compelled, then, after having swallowed the contents of his
Title:  bottle, to pass the time as well as to evade suspicion, to fall
Title:  into the easiest position in his corner and to sleep, whether
Title:  well or ill.  D'Artagnan, be it remembered, was only twenty years
Title:  old, and at that age sleep has its imprescriptible rights which
Title:  it imperiously insists upon, even with the saddest hearts.
Title:  
Title:  Toward six o'clock d'Artagnan awoke with that uncomfortable
Title:  feeling which generally accompanies the break of day after a bad
Title:  night.  He was not long in making his toilet.  He examined
Title:  himself to see if advantage had been taken of his sleep, and
Title:  having found his diamond ring on his finger, his purse in his
Title:  pocket, and his pistols in his belt, he rose, paid for his
Title:  bottle, and went out to try if he could have any better luck in
Title:  his search after his lackey than he had had the night before.
Title:  The first thing he perceived through the damp gray mist was
Title:  honest Planchet, who, with the two horses in hand, awaited him at
Title:  the door of a little blind cabaret, before which d'Artagnan had
Title:  passed without even a suspicion of its existence.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  25  PORTHOS
Title:  
Title:  Instead of returning directly home, d'Artagnan alighted at the
Title:  door of M. de Treville, and ran quickly up the stairs.  This time
Title:  he had decided to relate all that had passed.  M. de Treville
Title:  would doubtless give him good advice as to the whole affair.
Title:  Besides, as M. de Treville saw the queen almost daily, he might
Title:  be able to draw from her Majesty some intelligence of the poor
Title:  young woman, whom they were doubtless making pay very dearly for
Title:  her devotedness to her mistress.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville listened to the young man's account with a
Title:  seriousness which proved that he saw something else in this
Title:  adventure besides a love affair.  When d'Artagnan had finished,
Title:  he said, "Hum!  All this savors of his Eminence, a league off."
Title:  
Title:  "But what is to be done?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing, absolutely nothing, at present, but quitting Paris,
Title:  as I told you, as soon as possible.  I will see the queen; I will
Title:  relate to her the details of the disappearance of this poor
Title:  woman, of which she is no doubt ignorant.  These details will
Title:  guide her on her part, and on your return, I shall perhaps have
Title:  some good news to tell you.  Rely on me."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan knew that, although a Gascon, M. de Treville was not
Title:  in the habit of making promises, and that when by chance he did
Title:  promise, he more than kept his word.  He bowed to him, then, full
Title:  of gratitude for the past and for the future; and the worthy
Title:  captain, who on his side felt a lively interest in this young
Title:  man, so brave and so resolute, pressed his hand kindly, wishing
Title:  him a pleasant journey.
Title:  
Title:  Determined to put the advice of M. de Treville in practice
Title:  instantly, d'Artagnan directed his course toward the Rue des
Title:  Fossoyeurs, in order to superintend the packing of his valise.
Title:  On approaching the house, he perceived M. Bonacieux in morning
Title:  costume, standing at his threshold.  All that the prudent
Title:  Planchet had said to him the preceding evening about the sinister
Title:  character of the old man recurred to the mind of d'Artagnan, who
Title:  looked at him with more attention than he had done before.  In
Title:  fact, in addition to that yellow, sickly paleness which indicates
Title:  the insinuation of the bile in the blood, and which might,
Title:  besides, be accidental, d'Artagnan remarked something
Title:  perfidiously significant in the play of the wrinkled features of
Title:  his countenance.  A rogue does not laugh in the same way that an
Title:  honest man does; a hypocrite does not shed the tears of a man of
Title:  good faith.  All falsehood is a mask; and however well made the
Title:  mask may be, with a little attention we may always succeed in
Title:  distinguishing it from the true face.
Title:  
Title:  It appeared, then, to d'Artagnan that M. Bonacieux wore a mask,
Title:  and likewise that that mask was most disagreeable to look upon.
Title:  In consequence of this feeling of repugnance, he was about to
Title:  pass without speaking to him, but, as he had done the day before,
Title:  M. Bonacieux accosted him.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, young man," said he, "we appear to pass rather gay nights!
Title:  Seven o'clock in the morning!  PESTE!  You seem to reverse
Title:  ordinary customs, and come home at the hour when other people are
Title:  going out."
Title:  
Title:  "No one can reproach you for anything of the kind, Monsieur
Title:  Bonacieux," said the young man; "you are a model for regular
Title:  people.  It is true that when a man possesses a young and pretty
Title:  wife, he has no need to seek happiness elsewhere.  Happiness
Title:  comes to meet him, does it not, Monsieur Bonacieux?"
Title:  
Title:  Bonacieux became as pale as death, and grinned a ghastly smile.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said Bonacieux, "you are a jocular companion!  But
Title:  where the devil were you gladding last night, my young master?
Title:  It does not appear to be very clean in the crossroads."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan glanced down at his boots, all covered with mud; but
Title:  that same glance fell upon the shoes and stockings of the mercer,
Title:  and it might have been said they had been dipped in the same mud
Title:  heap.  Both were stained with splashes of mud of the same
Title:  appearance.
Title:  
Title:  Then a sudden idea crossed the mind of d'Artagnan.  That little
Title:  stout man, short and elderly, that sort of lackey, dressed in
Title:  dark clothes, treated without ceremony by the men wearing swords
Title:  who composed the escort, was Bonacieux himself.  The husband had
Title:  presided at the abduction of his wife.
Title:  
Title:  A terrible inclination seized d'Artagnan to grasp the mercer by
Title:  the throat and strangle him; but, as we have said, he was a very
Title:  prudent youth, and he restrained himself.  However, the
Title:  revolution which appeared upon his countenance was so visible
Title:  that Bonacieux was terrified at it, and he endeavored to draw
Title:  back a step or two; but as he was standing before the half of the
Title:  door which was shut, the obstacle compelled him to keep his
Title:  place.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, but you are joking, my worthy man!" said d'Artagnan.  It
Title:  appears to me that if my boots need a sponge, your stockings and
Title:  shoes stand in equal need of a brush.  May you not have been
Title:  philandering a little also, Monsieur Bonacieux?  Oh, the devil!
Title:  That's unpardonable in a man of your age, and who besides, has
Title:  such a pretty wife as yours."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, Lord! no," said Bonacieux, "but yesterday I went to St.
Title:  Mande to make some inquiries after a servant, as I cannot
Title:  possibly do without one; and the roads were so bad that I brought
Title:  back all this mud, which I have not yet had time to remove."
Title:  
Title:  The place named by Bonacieux as that which had been the object of
Title:  his journey was a fresh proof in support of the suspicions
Title:  d'Artagnan had conceived.  Bonacieux had named Mande because
Title:  Mande was in an exactly opposite direction from St. Cloud.  This
Title:  probability afforded him his first consolation.  If Bonacieux
Title:  knew where his wife was, one might, by extreme means, force the
Title:  mercer to open his teeth and let his secret escape.  The
Title:  question, then, was how to change this probability into a
Title:  certainty.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, if I don't stand upon
Title:  ceremony," said d'Artagnan, "but nothing makes one so thirsty as
Title:  want of sleep.  I am parched with thirst.  Allow me to take a
Title:  glass of water in your apartment; you know that is never refused
Title:  among neighbors."
Title:  
Title:  Without waiting for the permission of his host, d'Artagnan went
Title:  quickly into the house, and cast a rapid glance at the bed.  It
Title:  had not been used.  Bonacieux had not been abed.  He had only
Title:  been back an hour or two; he had accompanied his wife to the
Title:  place of her confinement, or else at least to the first relay.
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, Monsieur Bonacieux," said d'Artagnan, emptying his
Title:  glass, "that is all I wanted of you.  I will now go up into my
Title:  apartment.  I will make Planchet brush my boots; and when he has
Title:  done, I will, if you like, send him to you to brush your shoes."
Title:  
Title:  He left the mercer quite astonished at his singular farewell, and
Title:  asking himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate.
Title:  
Title:  At the top of the stairs he found Planchet in a great fright.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur!" cried Planchet, as soon as he perceived his
Title:  master, "here is more trouble.  I thought you would never come
Title:  in."
Title:  
Title:  "What's the matter now, Planchet?" demanded d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!  I give you a hundred, I give you a thousand times to guess,
Title:  monsieur, the visit I received in your absence."
Title:  
Title:  "When?"
Title:  
Title:  "About half an hour ago, while you were at Monsieur de
Title:  Treville's."
Title:  
Title:  "Who has been here?  Come, speak."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur de Cavois."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur de Cavois?"
Title:  
Title:  "In person."
Title:  
Title:  "The captain of the cardinal's Guards?"
Title:  
Title:  "Himself."
Title:  
Title:  "Did he come to arrest me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have no doubt that he did, monsieur, for all his wheedling
Title:  manner."
Title:  
Title:  "Was he so sweet, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed, he was all honey, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  "He came, he said, on the part of his Eminence, who wished you
Title:  well, and to beg you to follow him to the Palais-Royal."*
Title:  
Title:  *It was called the Palais-Cardinal before Richelieu gave it to
Title:  the King.
Title:  
Title:  "What did you answer him?"
Title:  
Title:  "That the thing was impossible, seeing that you were not at home,
Title:  as he could see."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what did he say then?"
Title:  
Title:  "That you must not fail to call upon him in the course of the
Title:  day; and then he added in a low voice, 'Tell your master that his
Title:  Eminence is very well disposed toward him, and that his fortune
Title:  perhaps depends upon this interview.'"
Title:  
Title:  "The snare is rather MALADROIT for the cardinal," replied the
Title:  young man, smiling.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I saw the snare, and I answered you would be quite in
Title:  despair on your return.
Title:  
Title:  "'Where has he gone?' asked Monsieur de Cavois.
Title:  
Title:  "'To Troyes, in Champagne,' I answered.
Title:  
Title:  "'And when did he set out?'
Title:  
Title:  "'Yesterday evening.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet, my friend," interrupted d'Artagnan, "you are really a
Title:  precious fellow."
Title:  
Title:  "You will understand, monsieur, I thought there would be still
Title:  time, if you wish, to see Monsieur de Cavois to contradict me by
Title:  saying you were not yet gone.  The falsehood would then lie at my
Title:  door, and as I am not a gentleman, I may be allowed to lie."
Title:  
Title:  "Be of good heart, Planchet, you shall preserve your reputation
Title:  as a veracious man.  In a quarter of an hour we set off."
Title:  
Title:  "That's the advice I was about to give Monsieur; and where are we
Title:  going, may I ask, without being too curious?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU!  In the opposite direction to that which you said I was
Title:  gone.  Besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of Grimaud,
Title:  Mousqueton, and Bazin as I am to know what has become of Athos,
Title:  Porthos, and Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," said Planchet, "and I will go as soon as you
Title:  please.  Indeed, I think provincial air will suit us much better
Title:  just now than the air of Paris.  So then--"
Title:  
Title:  "So then, pack up our luggage, Planchet, and let us be off.  On
Title:  my part, I will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothing
Title:  may be suspected.  You may join me at the Hotel des Gardes.  By
Title:  the way, Planchet, I think you are right with respect to our
Title:  host, and that he is decidedly a frightfully low wretch."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur, you may take my word when I tell you anything.  I
Title:  am a physiognomist, I assure you."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan went out first, as had been agreed upon.  Then, in
Title:  order that he might have nothing to reproach himself with, he
Title:  directed his steps, for the last time, toward the residences of
Title:  his three friends.  No news had been received of them; only a
Title:  letter, all perfumed and of an elegant writing in small
Title:  characters, had come for Aramis.  D'Artagnan took charge of it.
Title:  Ten minutes afterward Planchet joined him at the stables of the
Title:  Hotel des Gardes.  D'Artagnan, in order that there might be no
Title:  time lost, had saddled his horse himself.
Title:  
Title:  "That's well," said he to Planchet, when the latter added the
Title:  portmanteau to the equipment.  "Now saddle the other three
Title:  horses."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you think, then, monsieur, that we shall travel faster with
Title:  two horses apiece?" said Planchet, with his shrewd air.
Title:  
Title:  "No, Monsieur Jester," replied d'Artagnan; "but with our four
Title:  horses we may bring back our three friends, if we should have the
Title:  good fortune to find them living."
Title:  
Title:  "Which is a great chance," replied Planchet, "but we must not
Title:  despair of the mercy of God."
Title:  
Title:  "Amen!" said d'Artagnan, getting into his saddle.
Title:  
Title:  As they went from the Hotel des Gardes, they separated, leaving
Title:  the street at opposite ends, one having to quit Paris by the
Title:  Barriere de la Villette and the other by the Barriere Montmartre,
Title:  to meet again beyond St. Denis--a strategic maneuver which,
Title:  having been executed with equal punctuality, was crowned with the
Title:  most fortunate results.  D'Artagnan and Planchet entered
Title:  Pierrefitte together.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet was more courageous, it must be admitted, by day than by
Title:  night.  His natural prudence, however, never forsook him for a
Title:  single instant.  He had forgotten not one of the incidents of the
Title:  first journey, and he looked upon everybody he met on the road as
Title:  an enemy.  It followed that his hat was forever in his hand,
Title:  which procured him some severe reprimands from d'Artagnan, who
Title:  feared that his excess of politeness would lead people to think
Title:  he was the lackey of a man of no consequence.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, whether the passengers were really touched by the
Title:  urbanity of Planchet or whether this time nobody was posted on
Title:  the young man's road, our two travelers arrived at Chantilly
Title:  without any accident, and alighted at the tavern of Great St.
Title:  Martin, the same at which they had stopped on their first
Title:  journey.
Title:  
Title:  The host, on seeing a young man followed by a lackey with two
Title:  extra horses, advanced respectfully to the door.  Now, as they
Title:  had already traveled eleven leagues, d'Artagnan thought it time
Title:  to stop, whether Porthos were or were not in the inn.  Perhaps it
Title:  would not be prudent to ask at once what had become of the
Title:  Musketeer.  The result of these reflections was that d'Artagnan,
Title:  without asking information of any kind, alighted, commended the
Title:  horses to the care of his lackey, entered a small room destined
Title:  to receive those who wished to be alone, and desired the host to
Title:  bring him a bottle of his best wine and as good a breakfast as
Title:  possible--a desire which further corroborated the high opinion
Title:  the innkeeper had formed of the traveler at first sight.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was therefore served with miraculous celerity.  The
Title:  regiment of the Guards was recruited among the first gentlemen of
Title:  the kingdom; and d'Artagnan, followed by a lackey, and traveling
Title:  with four magnificent horses, despite the simplicity of his
Title:  uniform, could not fail to make a sensation.  The host desired
Title:  himself to serve him; which d'Artagnan perceiving, ordered two
Title:  glasses to be brought, and commenced the following conversation.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, my good host," said d'Artagnan, filling the two
Title:  glasses, "I asked for a bottle of your best wine, and if you have
Title:  deceived me, you will be punished in what you have sinned; for
Title:  seeing that I hate drinking my myself, you shall drink with me.
Title:  Take your glass, then, and let us drink.  But what shall we drink
Title:  to, so as to avoid wounding any susceptibility?  Let us drink to
Title:  the prosperity of your establishment."
Title:  
Title:  "Your Lordship does me much honor," said the host, "and I thank
Title:  you sincerely for your kind wish."
Title:  
Title:  "But don't mistake," said d'Artagnan, "there is more selfishness
Title:  in my toast than perhaps you may think--for it is only in
Title:  prosperous establishments that one is well received.  In hotels
Title:  that do not flourish, everything is in confusion, and the
Title:  traveler is a victim to the embarrassments of his host.  Now, I
Title:  travel a great deal, particularly on this road, and I wish to see
Title:  all innkeepers making a fortune."
Title:  
Title:  "It seems to me," said the host, "that this is not the first time
Title:  I have had the honor of seeing Monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Bah, I have passed perhaps ten times through Chantilly, and out
Title:  of the ten times I have stopped three or four times at your house
Title:  at least.  Why I was here only ten or twelve days ago.  I was
Title:  conducting some friends, Musketeers, one of whom, by the by, had
Title:  a dispute with a stranger--a man who sought a quarrel with him,
Title:  for I don't know what."
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly so," said the host; "I remember it perfectly.  It is not
Title:  Monsieur Porthos that your Lordship means?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that is my companion's name.  My God, my dear host, tell me
Title:  if anything has happened to him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Your Lordship must have observed that he could not continue his
Title:  journey."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, to be sure, he promised to rejoin us, and we have seen
Title:  nothing of him."
Title:  
Title:  "He has done us the honor to remain here."
Title:  
Title:  "What, he had done you the honor to remain here?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur, in this house; and we are even a little uneasy--"
Title:  
Title:  "On what account?"
Title:  
Title:  "Of certain expenses he has contracted."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but whatever expenses he may have incurred, I am sure he
Title:  is in a condition to pay them."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur, you infuse genuine balm into my blood.  We have
Title:  made considerable advances; and this very morning the surgeon
Title:  declared that if Monsieur Porthos did not pay him, he should look
Title:  to me, as it was I who had sent for him."
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos is wounded, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "I cannot tell you, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "What!  You cannot tell me?  Surely you ought to be able to tell
Title:  me better than any other person."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but in our situation we must not say all we know--
Title:  particularly as we have been warned that our ears should answer
Title:  for our tongues."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, can I see Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly, monsieur.  Take the stairs on your right; go up the
Title:  first flight and knock at Number One.  Only warn him that it is
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "Why should I do that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because, monsieur, some mischief might happen to you."
Title:  
Title:  "Of what kind, in the name of wonder?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Porthos may imagine you belong to the house, and in a
Title:  fit of passion might run his sword through you or blow out your
Title:  brains."
Title:  
Title:  "What have you done to him, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "We have asked him for money."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  Ah, I can understand that.  It is a demand that
Title:  Porthos takes very ill when he is not in funds; but I know he
Title:  must be so at present."
Title:  
Title:  "We thought so, too, monsieur.  As our house is carried on very
Title:  regularly, and we make out our bills every week, at the end of
Title:  eight days we presented our account; but it appeared we had
Title:  chosen an unlucky moment, for at the first word on the subject,
Title:  he sent us to all the devils.  It is true he had been playing the
Title:  day before."
Title:  
Title:  "Playing the day before!  And with whom?"
Title:  
Title:  "Lord, who can say, monsieur?  With some gentleman who was
Title:  traveling this way, to whom he proposed a game of LANSQUENET."
Title:  
Title:  "That's it, then, and the foolish fellow lost all he had?"
Title:  
Title:  "Even to his horse, monsieur; for when the gentleman was about to
Title:  set out, we perceived that his lackey was saddling Monsieur
Title:  Porthos's horse, as well as his master's.  When we observed this
Title:  to him, he told us all to trouble ourselves about our own
Title:  business, as this horse belonged to him.  We also informed
Title:  Monsieur Porthos of what was going on; but he told us we were
Title:  scoundrels to doubt a gentleman's word, and that as he had said
Title:  the horse was his, it must be so."
Title:  
Title:  "That's Porthos all over," murmured d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Then," continued the host, "I replied that as from the moment we
Title:  seemed not likely to come to a good understanding with respect to
Title:  payment, I hoped that he would have at least the kindness to
Title:  grant the favor of his custom to my brother host of the Golden
Title:  Eagle; but Monsieur Porthos replied that, my house being the
Title:  best, he should remain where he was.  This reply was too
Title:  flattering to allow me to insist on his departure.  I confined
Title:  myself then to begging him to give up his chamber, which is the
Title:  handsomest in the hotel, and to be satisfied with a pretty little
Title:  room on the third floor; but to this Monsieur Porthos replied
Title:  that as he every moment expected his mistress, who was one of the
Title:  greatest ladies in the court, I might easily comprehend that the
Title:  chamber he did me the honor to occupy in my house was itself very
Title:  mean for the visit of such a personage.  Nevertheless, while
Title:  acknowledging the truth of what he said, I thought proper to
Title:  insist; but without even giving himself the trouble to enter into
Title:  any discussion with me, he took one of his pistols, laid it on
Title:  his table, day and night, and said that at the first word that
Title:  should be spoken to him about removing, either within the house
Title:  or out of it, he would blow out the brains of the person who
Title:  should be so imprudent as to meddle with a matter which only
Title:  concerned himself.  Since that time, monsieur, nobody entered his
Title:  chamber but his servant."
Title:  
Title:  "What!  Mousqueton is here, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, monsieur.  Five days after your departure, he came
Title:  back, and in a very bad condition, too.  It appears that he had
Title:  met with disagreeableness, likewise, on his journey.  Unfortunately,
Title:  he is more nimble than his master; so that for the sake of his
Title:  master, he puts us all under his feet, and as he thinks we might
Title:  refuse what he asked for, he takes all he wants without asking at
Title:  all."
Title:  
Title:  "The fact is," said d'Artagnan, "I have always observed a great
Title:  degree of intelligence and devotedness in Mousqueton."
Title:  
Title:  "That is possible, monsieur; but suppose I should happen to be
Title:  brought in contact, even four times a year, with such
Title:  intelligence and devotedness--why, I should be a ruined man!"
Title:  
Title:  "No, for Porthos will pay you."
Title:  
Title:  "Hum!" said the host, in a doubtful tone.
Title:  
Title:  "The favorite of a great lady will not be allowed to be
Title:  inconvenienced for such a paltry sum as he owes you."
Title:  
Title:  "If I durst say what I believe on that head--"
Title:  
Title:  "What you believe?"
Title:  
Title:  "I ought rather to say, what I know."
Title:  
Title:  "What you know?"
Title:  
Title:  "And even what I am sure of."
Title:  
Title:  "And of what are you so sure?"
Title:  
Title:  "I would say that I know this great lady."
Title:  
Title:  "You?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; I."
Title:  
Title:  "And how do you know her?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, monsieur, if I could believe I might trust in your
Title:  discretion."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak!  By the word of a gentleman, you shall have no cause to
Title:  repent of your confidence."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monsieur, you understand that uneasiness makes us do many
Title:  things."
Title:  
Title:  "What have you done?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, nothing which was not right in the character of a creditor."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Porthos gave us a note for his duchess, ordering us to
Title:  put it in the post.  This was before his servant came.  As he
Title:  could not leave his chamber, it was necessary to charge us with
Title:  this commission."
Title:  
Title:  "And then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Instead of putting the letter in the post, which is never safe,
Title:  I took advantage of the journey of one of my lads to Paris, and
Title:  ordered him to convey the letter to this duchess himself.  This
Title:  was fulfilling the intentions of Monsieur Porthos, who had
Title:  desired us to be so careful of this letter, was it not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nearly so."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monsieur, do you know who this great lady is?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; I have heard Porthos speak of her, that's all."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know who this pretended duchess is?
Title:  
Title:  "I repeat to you, I don't know her."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, she is the old wife of a procurator* of the Chatelet,
Title:  monsieur, named Madame Coquenard, who, although she is at least
Title:  fifty, still gives herself jealous airs.  It struck me as very
Title:  odd that a princess should live in the Rue aux Ours."
Title:  
Title:  *Attorney
Title:  
Title:  "But how do you know all this?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because she flew into a great passion on receiving the letter,
Title:  saying that Monsieur Porthos was a weathercock, and that she was
Title:  sure it was for some woman he had received this wound."
Title:  
Title:  "Has he been wounded, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, good Lord!  What have I said?"
Title:  
Title:  "You said that Porthos had received a sword cut."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but he has forbidden me so strictly to say so."
Title:  
Title:  "And why so."
Title:  
Title:  "Zounds, monsieur!  Because he had boasted that he would
Title:  perforate the stranger with whom you left him in dispute; whereas
Title:  the stranger, on the contrary, in spite of all his rodomontades
Title:  quickly threw him on his back.  As Monsieur Porthos is a very
Title:  boastful man, he insists that nobody shall know he has received
Title:  this wound except the duchess, whom he endeavored to interest by
Title:  an account of his adventure."
Title:  
Title:  "It is a wound that confines him to his bed?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, and a master stroke, too, I assure you.  Your friend's soul
Title:  must stick tight to his body."
Title:  
Title:  "Were you there, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, I followed them from curiosity, so that I saw the
Title:  combat without the combatants seeing me."
Title:  
Title:  "And what took place?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!  The affair was not long, I assure you.  They placed
Title:  themselves on guard; the stranger made a feint and a lunge, and
Title:  that so rapidly that when Monsieur Porthos came to the PARADE, he
Title:  had already three inches of steel in his breast.  He immediately
Title:  fell backward.  The stranger placed the point of his sword at his
Title:  throat; and Monsieur Porthos, finding himself at the mercy of his
Title:  adversary, acknowledged himself conquered.  Upon which the
Title:  stranger asked his name, and learning that it was Porthos, and
Title:  not d'Artagnan, he assisted him to rise, brought him back to the
Title:  hotel, mounted his horse, and disappeared."
Title:  
Title:  "So it was with Monsieur d'Artagnan this stranger meant to
Title:  quarrel?"
Title:  
Title:  "It appears so."
Title:  
Title:  "And do you know what has become of him?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, I never saw him until that moment, and have not seen him
Title:  since."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well; I know all that I wish to know.  Porthos's chamber
Title:  is, you say, on the first story, Number One?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur, the handsomest in the inn--a chamber that I could
Title:  have let ten times over."
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!  Be satisfied," said d'Artagnan, laughing, "Porthos will
Title:  pay you with the money of the Duchess Coquenard."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, monsieur, procurator's wife or duchess, if she will but
Title:  loosen her pursestrings, it will be all the same; but she
Title:  positively answered that she was tired of the exigencies and
Title:  infidelities of Monsieur Porthos, and that she would not send him
Title:  a denier."
Title:  
Title:  "And did you convey this answer to your guest?"
Title:  
Title:  "We took good care not to do that; he would have found in what
Title:  fashion we had executed his commission."
Title:  
Title:  "So that he still expects his money?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, Lord, yes, monsieur!  Yesterday he wrote again; but it was
Title:  his servant who this time put the letter in the post."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you say the procurator's wife is old and ugly?"
Title:  
Title:  "Fifty at least, monsieur, and not at all handsome, according to
Title:  Pathaud's account."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case, you may be quite at ease; she will soon be
Title:  softened.  Besides, Porthos cannot owe you much."
Title:  
Title:  "How, not much!  Twenty good pistoles, already, without reckoning
Title:  the doctor.  He denies himself nothing; it may easily be seen he
Title:  has been accustomed to live well."
Title:  
Title:  "Never mind; if his mistress abandons him, he will find friends,
Title:  I will answer for it.  So, my dear host, be not uneasy, and
Title:  continue to take all the care of him that his situation
Title:  requires."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur has promised me not to open his mouth about the
Title:  procurator's wife, and not to say a word of the wound?"
Title:  
Title:  "That's agreed; you have my word."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, he would kill me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Don't be afraid; he is not so much of a devil as he appears."
Title:  
Title:  Saying these words, d'Artagnan went upstairs, leaving his host a
Title:  little better satisfied with respect to two things in which he
Title:  appeared to be very much interested--his debt and his life.
Title:  
Title:  At the top of the stairs, upon the most conspicuous door of the
Title:  corridor, was traced in black ink a gigantic number "1."
Title:  d'Artagnan knocked, and upon the bidding to come in which came
Title:  from inside, he entered the chamber.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos was in bed, and was playing a game at LANSQUENET with
Title:  Mousqueton, to keep his hand in; while a spit loaded with
Title:  partridges was turning before the fire, and on each side of a
Title:  large chimneypiece, over two chafing dishes, were boiling two
Title:  stewpans, from which exhaled a double odor of rabbit and fish
Title:  stews, rejoicing to the smell.  In addition to this he perceived
Title:  that the top of a wardrobe and the marble of a commode were
Title:  covered with empty bottles.
Title:  
Title:  At the sight of his friend, Porthos uttered a loud cry of joy;
Title:  and Mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his place to him,
Title:  and went to give an eye to the two stewpans, of which he appeared
Title:  to have the particular inspection.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, PARDIEU!  Is that you?" said Porthos to d'Artagnan.  "You
Title:  are right welcome.  Excuse my not coming to meet you; but," added
Title:  he, looking at d'Artagnan with a certain degree of uneasiness,
Title:  "you know what has happened to me?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "Has the host told you nothing, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "I asked after you, and came up as soon as I could."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos seemed to breathe more freely.
Title:  
Title:  "And what has happened to you, my dear Porthos?" continued
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, on making a thrust at my adversary, whom I had already hit
Title:  three times, and whom I meant to finish with the fourth, I put my
Title:  foot on a stone, slipped, and strained my knee."
Title:  
Title:  "Truly?"
Title:  
Title:  "Honor!  Luckily for the rascal, for I should have left him dead
Title:  on the spot, I assure you."
Title:  
Title:  "And what has became of him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I don't know; he had enough, and set off without waiting for
Title:  the rest.  But you, my dear d'Artagnan, what has happened to
Title:  you?"
Title:  
Title:  "So that this strain of the knee," continued d'Artagnan, "my dear
Title:  Porthos, keeps you in bed?"
Title:  
Title:  "My God, that's all.  I shall be about again in a few days."
Title:  
Title:  "Why did you not have yourself conveyed to Paris?  You must be
Title:  cruelly bored here."
Title:  
Title:  "That was my intention; but, my dear friend, I have one thing to
Title:  confess to you."
Title:  
Title:  "What's that?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is that as I was cruelly bored, as you say, and as I had the
Title:  seventy-five pistoles in my pocket which you had distributed to
Title:  me, in order to amuse myself I invited a gentleman who was
Title:  traveling this way to walk up, and proposed a cast of dice.  He
Title:  accepted my challenge, and, my faith, my seventy-five pistoles
Title:  passed from my pocket to his, without reckoning my horse, which
Title:  he won into the bargain.  But you, my dear d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "What can you expect, my dear Porthos; a man is not privileged in
Title:  all ways," said d'Artagnan.  "You know the proverb 'Unlucky at
Title:  play, lucky in love.'  You are too fortunate in your love for
Title:  play not to take its revenge.  What consequence can the reverses
Title:  of fortune be to you?  Have you not, happy rogue that you are--
Title:  have you not your duchess, who cannot fail to come to your aid?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, you see, my dear d'Artagnan, with what ill luck I play,"
Title:  replied Porthos, with the most careless air in the world.  "I
Title:  wrote to her to send me fifty louis or so, of which I stood
Title:  absolutely in need on account of my accident."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, she must be at her country seat, for she has not answered
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "Truly?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; so I yesterday addressed another epistle to her, still more
Title:  pressing than the first.  But you are here, my dear fellow, let
Title:  us speak of you.  I confess I began to be very uneasy on your
Title:  account."
Title:  
Title:  "But your host behaves very well toward you, as it appears, my
Title:  dear Porthos," said d'Artagnan, directing the sick man's
Title:  attention to the full stewpans and the empty bottles.
Title:  
Title:  "So, so," replied Porthos.  "Only three or four days ago the
Title:  impertinent jackanapes gave me his bill, and I was forced to turn
Title:  both him and his bill out of the door; so that I am here
Title:  something in the fashion of a conqueror, holding my position, as
Title:  it were, my conquest.  So you see, being in constant fear of
Title:  being forced from that position, I am armed to the teeth."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet," said d'Artagnan, laughing, "it appears to me that from
Title:  time to time you must make SORTIES."  And he again pointed to the
Title:  bottles and the stewpans.
Title:  
Title:  "Not I, unfortunately!" said Porthos.  "This miserable strain
Title:  confines me to my bed; but Mousqueton forages, and brings in
Title:  provisions.  Friend Mousqueton, you see that we have a
Title:  reinforcement, and we must have an increase of supplies."
Title:  
Title:  "Mousqueton," said d'Artagnan, "you must render me a service."
Title:  
Title:  "What, monsieur?"
Title:  
Title:  "You must give your recipe to Planchet.  I may be besieged in my
Title:  turn, and I shall not be sorry for him to be able to let me enjoy
Title:  the same advantages with which you gratify your master."
Title:  
Title:  "Lord, monsieur!  There is nothing more easy," said Mousqueton,
Title:  with a modest air.  "One only needs to be sharp, that's all.  I
Title:  was brought up in the country, and my father in his leisure time
Title:  was something of a poacher."
Title:  
Title:  "And what did he do the rest of his time?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, he carried on a trade which I have always thought
Title:  satisfactory."
Title:  
Title:  "Which?"
Title:  
Title:  "As it was a time of war between the Catholics and the Huguenots,
Title:  and as he saw the Catholics exterminate the Huguenots and the
Title:  Huguenots exterminate the Catholics--all in the name of
Title:  religion--he adopted a mixed belief which permitted him to be
Title:  sometimes Catholic, sometimes a Huguenot.  Now, he was accustomed
Title:  to walk with his fowling piece on his shoulder, behind the hedges
Title:  which border the roads, and when he saw a Catholic coming alone,
Title:  the Protestant religion immediately prevailed in his mind.  He
Title:  lowered his gun in the direction of the traveler; then, when he
Title:  was within ten paces of him, he commenced a conversation which
Title:  almost always ended by the traveler's abandoning his purse to
Title:  save his life.  It goes without saying that when he saw a
Title:  Huguenot coming, he felt himself filled with such ardent Catholic
Title:  zeal that he could not understand how, a quarter of an hour
Title:  before, he had been able to have any doubts upon the superiority
Title:  of our holy religion.  For my part, monsieur, I am Catholic--my
Title:  father, faithful to his principles, having made my elder brother
Title:  a Huguenot."
Title:  
Title:  "And what was the end of this worthy man?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, of the most unfortunate kind, monsieur.  One day he was
Title:  surprised in a lonely road between a Huguenot and a Catholic,
Title:  with both of whom he had before had business, and who both knew
Title:  him again; so they united against him and hanged him on a tree.
Title:  Then they came and boasted of their fine exploit in the cabaret
Title:  of the next village, where my brother and I were drinking."
Title:  
Title:  "And what did you do?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "We let them tell their story out," replied Mousqueton.  "Then,
Title:  as in leaving the cabaret they took different directions, my
Title:  brother went and hid himself on the road of the Catholic, and I
Title:  on that of the Huguenot.  Two hours after, all was over; we had
Title:  done the business of both, admiring the foresight of our poor
Title:  father, who had taken the precaution to bring each of us up in a
Title:  different religion."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I must allow, as you say, your father was a very
Title:  intelligent fellow.  And you say in his leisure moments the
Title:  worthy man was a poacher?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur, and it was he who taught me to lay a snare and
Title:  ground a line.  The consequence is that when I saw our laborers,
Title:  which did not at all suit two such delicate stomachs as ours, I
Title:  had recourse to a little of my old trade.  While walking near the
Title:  wood of Monsieur le Prince, I laid a few snare in the runs; and
Title:  while reclining on the banks of his Highness's pieces of water, I
Title:  slipped a few lines into his fish ponds.  So that now, thanks be
Title:  to God, we do not want, as Monsieur can testify, for partridges,
Title:  rabbits, carp or eels--all light, wholesome food, suitable for
Title:  the sick."
Title:  
Title:  "But the wine," said d'Artagnan, "who furnishes the wine?  Your
Title:  host?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, yes and no."
Title:  
Title:  "How yes and no?"
Title:  
Title:  "He furnishes it, it is true, but he does not know that he has
Title:  that honor."
Title:  
Title:  "Explain yourself, Mousqueton; your conversation is full of
Title:  instructive things."
Title:  
Title:  "That is it, monsieur.  It has so chanced that I met with a
Title:  Spaniard in my peregrinations who had seen many countries, and
Title:  among them the New World."
Title:  
Title:  "What connection can the New World have with the bottles which
Title:  are on the commode and the wardrobe?"
Title:  
Title:  "Patience, monsieur, everything will come in its turn."
Title:  
Title:  "This Spaniard had in his service a lackey who had accompanied
Title:  him in his voyage to Mexico.  This lackey was my compatriot; and
Title:  we became the more intimate from there being many resemblances of
Title:  character between us.  We loved sporting of all kinds better than
Title:  anything; so that he related to me how in the plains of the
Title:  Pampas the natives hunt the tiger and the wild bull with simple
Title:  running nooses which they throw to a distance of twenty or thirty
Title:  paces the end of a cord with such nicety; but in face of the
Title:  proof I was obliged to acknowledge the truth of the recital.  My
Title:  friend placed a bottle at the distance of thirty paces, and at
Title:  each cast he caught the neck of the bottle in his running noose.
Title:  I practiced this exercise, and as nature has endowed me with some
Title:  faculties, at this day I can throw the lasso with any man in the
Title:  world.  Well, do you understand, monsieur?  Our host has a well-
Title:  furnished cellar the key of which never leaves him; only this
Title:  cellar has a ventilating hole.  Now through this ventilating
Title:  hole I throw my lasso, and as I now know in which part of the
Title:  cellar is the best wine, that's my point for sport.  You see,
Title:  monsieur, what the New World has to do with the bottles which are
Title:  on the commode and the wardrobe.  Now, will you taste our wine,
Title:  and without prejudice say what you think of it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Thank you, my friend, thank you; unfortunately, I have just
Title:  breakfasted."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Porthos, "arrange the table, Mousqueton, and while
Title:  we breakfast, d'Artagnan will relate to us what has happened to
Title:  him during the ten days since he left us."
Title:  
Title:  "Willingly," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  While Porthos and Mousqueton were breakfasting, with the
Title:  appetites of convalescents and with that brotherly cordiality
Title:  which unites men in misfortune, d'Artagnan related how Aramis,
Title:  being wounded, was obliged to stop at Crevecoeur, how he had left
Title:  Athos fighting at Amiens with four men who accused him of being a
Title:  coiner, and how he, d'Artagnan, had been forced to run the Comtes
Title:  de Wardes through the body in order to reach England.
Title:  
Title:  But there the confidence of d'Artagnan stopped.  He only added
Title:  that on his return from Great Britain he had brought back four
Title:  magnificent horses--one for himself, and one for each of his
Title:  companions; then he informed Porthos that the one intended for
Title:  him was already installed in the stable of the tavern.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment Planchet entered, to inform his master that the
Title:  horses were sufficiently refreshed and that it would be possible
Title:  to sleep at Clermont.
Title:  
Title:  As d'Artagnan was tolerably reassured with regard to Porthos, and
Title:  as he was anxious to obtain news of his two other friends, he
Title:  held out his hand to the wounded man, and told him he was about
Title:  to resume his route in order to continue his researches.  For the
Title:  rest, as he reckoned upon returning by the same route in seven or
Title:  eight days, if Porthos were still at the Great St. Martin, he
Title:  would call for him on his way.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would not
Title:  permit him to depart yet awhile.  Besides, it was necessary he
Title:  should stay at Chantilly to wait for the answer from his duchess.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan wished that answer might be prompt and favorable; and
Title:  having again recommended Porthos to the care of Mousqueton, and
Title:  paid his bill to the host, he resumed his route with Planchet,
Title:  already relieved of one of his led horses.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  26  ARAMIS AND HIS THESIS
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had said nothing to Porthos of his wound or of his
Title:  procurator's wife.  Our Bearnais was a prudent lad, however young
Title:  he might be.  Consequently he had appeared to believe all that
Title:  the vainglorious Musketeer had told him, convinced that no
Title:  friendship will hold out against a surprised secret.  Besides, we
Title:  feel always a sort of mental superiority over those whose lives
Title:  we know better than they suppose.  In his projects of intrigue
Title:  for the future, and determined as he was to make his three
Title:  friends the instruments of his fortune, d'Artagnan was not sorry
Title:  at getting into his grasp beforehand the invisible strings by
Title:  which he reckoned upon moving them.
Title:  
Title:  And yet, as he journeyed along, a profound sadness weighed upon
Title:  his heart.  He thought of that young and pretty Mme. Bonacieux
Title:  who was to have paid him the price of his devotedness; but let us
Title:  hasten to say that this sadness possessed the young man less from
Title:  the regret of the happiness he had missed, than from the fear he
Title:  entertained that some serious misfortune had befallen the poor
Title:  woman.  For himself, he had no doubt she was a victim of the
Title:  cardinal's vengeance; and, and as was well known, the vengeance
Title:  of his Eminence was terrible.  How he had found grace in the eyes
Title:  of the minister, he did not know; but without doubt M. de Cavois
Title:  would have revealed this to him if the captain of the Guards had
Title:  found him at home.
Title:  
Title:  Nothing makes time pass more quickly or more shortens a journey
Title:  than a thought which absorbs in itself all the faculties of the
Title:  organization of him who thinks.  External existence then
Title:  resembles a sleep of which this thought is the dream.  By its
Title:  influence, time has no longer measure, space has no longer
Title:  distance.  We depart from one place, and arrive at another, that
Title:  is all.  Of the interval passed, nothing remains in the memory
Title:  but a vague mist in which a thousand confused images of trees,
Title:  mountains, and landscapes are lost.  It was as a prey to this
Title:  hallucination that d'Artagnan traveled, at whatever pace his
Title:  horse pleased, the six or eight leagues that separated Chantilly
Title:  from Crevecoeur, without his being able to remember on his
Title:  arrival in the village any of the things he had passed or met
Title:  with on the road.
Title:  
Title:  There only his memory returned to him.  He shook his head,
Title:  perceived the cabaret at which he had left Aramis, and putting
Title:  his horse to the trot, he shortly pulled up at the door.
Title:  
Title:  This time it was not a host but a hostess who received him.
Title:  d'Artagnan was a physiognomist.  His eye took in at a glance the
Title:  plump, cheerful countenance of the mistress of the place, and he
Title:  at once perceived there was no occasion for dissembling with her,
Title:  or of fearing anything from one blessed with such a joyous
Title:  physiognomy.
Title:  
Title:  "My good dame," asked d'Artagnan, "can you tell me what has
Title:  become of one of my friends, whom we were obliged to leave here
Title:  about a dozen days ago?"
Title:  
Title:  "A handsome young man, three- or four-and-twenty years old, mild,
Title:  amiable, and well made?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is he--wounded in the shoulder."
Title:  
Title:  "Just so.  Well, monsieur, he is still here."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, PARDIEU!  My dear dame," said d'Artagnan, springing from his
Title:  horse, and throwing the bridle to Planchet, "you restore me to
Title:  life; where is this dear Aramis?  Let me embrace him, I am in a
Title:  hurry to see him again."
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon, monsieur, but I doubt whether he can see you at this
Title:  moment."
Title:  
Title:  "Why so?  Has he a lady with him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Jesus!  What do you mean by that?  Poor lad!  No, monsieur, he
Title:  has not a lady with him."
Title:  
Title:  "With whom is he, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "With the curate of Montdidier and the superior of the Jesuits of
Title:  Amiens."
Title:  
Title:  "Good heavens!" cried d'Artagnan, "is the poor fellow worse,
Title:  then?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur, quite the contrary; but after his illness grace
Title:  touched him, and he determined to take orders."
Title:  
Title:  "That's it!" said d'Artagnan, "I had forgotten that he was only a
Title:  Musketeer for a time."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur still insists upon seeing him?"
Title:  
Title:  "More than ever."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monsieur has only to take the right-hand staircase in the
Title:  courtyard, and knock at Number Five on the second floor."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan walked quickly in the direction indicated, and found
Title:  one of those exterior staircases that are still to be seen in the
Title:  yards of our old-fashioned taverns.  But there was no getting at
Title:  the place of sojourn of the future abbe; the defiles of the
Title:  chamber of Aramis were as well guarded as the gardens of Armida.
Title:  Bazin was stationed in the corridor, and barred his passage with
Title:  the more intrepidity that, after many years of trial, Bazin found
Title:  himself near a result of which he had ever been ambitious.
Title:  
Title:  In fact, the dream of poor Bazin had always been to serve a
Title:  churchman; and he awaited with impatience the moment, always in
Title:  the future, when Aramis would throw aside the uniform and assume
Title:  the cassock.  The daily-renewed promise of the young man that the
Title:  moment would not long be delayed, had alone kept him in the
Title:  service of a Musketeer--a service in which, he said, his soul was
Title:  in constant jeopardy.
Title:  
Title:  Bazin was then at the height of joy.  In all probability, this
Title:  time his master would not retract.  The union of physical pain
Title:  with moral uneasiness had produced the effect so long desired.
Title:  Aramis, suffering at once in body and mind, had at length fixed
Title:  his eyes and his thoughts upon religion, and he had considered as
Title:  a warning from heaven the double accident which had happened to
Title:  him; that is to say, the sudden disappearance of his mistress and
Title:  the wound in his shoulder.
Title:  
Title:  It may be easily understood that in the present disposition of
Title:  his master nothing could be more disagreeable to Bazin than the
Title:  arrival of d'Artagnan, which might cast his master back again
Title:  into that vortex of mundane affairs which had so long carried him
Title:  away.  He resolved, then, to defend the door bravely; and as,
Title:  betrayed by the mistress of the inn, he could not say that Aramis
Title:  was absent, he endeavored to prove to the newcomer that it would
Title:  be the height of indiscretion to disturb his master in his pious
Title:  conference, which had commenced with the morning and would not,
Title:  as Bazin said, terminate before night.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan took very little heed of the eloquent discourse of
Title:  M. Bazin; and as he had no desire to support a polemic discussion
Title:  with his friend's valet, he simply moved him out of the way with
Title:  one hand, and with the other turned the handle of the door of
Title:  Number Five.  The door opened, and d'Artagnan went into the
Title:  chamber.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis, in a black gown, his head enveloped in a sort of round
Title:  flat cap, not much unlike a CALOTTE, was seated before an oblong
Title:  table, covered with rolls of paper and enormous volumes in folio.
Title:  At his right hand was placed the superior of the Jesuits, and on
Title:  his left the curate of Montdidier.  The curtains were half drawn,
Title:  and only admitted the mysterious light calculated for beatific
Title:  reveries.  All the mundane objects that generally strike the eye
Title:  on entering the room of a young man, particularly when that young
Title:  man is a Musketeer, had disappeared as if by enchantment; and for
Title:  fear, no doubt, that the sight of them might bring his master
Title:  back to ideas of this world, Bazin had laid his hands upon sword,
Title:  pistols, plumed hat, and embroideries and laces of all kinds and
Title:  sorts.  In their stead d'Artagnan thought he perceived in an
Title:  obscure corner a discipline cord suspended from a nail in the
Title:  wall.
Title:  
Title:  At the noise made by d'Artagnan in entering, Aramis lifted up his
Title:  head, and beheld his friend; but to the great astonishment of the
Title:  young man, the sight of him did not produce much effect upon the
Title:  Musketeer, so completely was his mind detached from the things of
Title:  this world.
Title:  
Title:  "Good day, dear d'Artagnan," said Aramis; "believe me, I am glad
Title:  to see you."
Title:  
Title:  "So am I delighted to see you," said d'Artagnan, "although I am
Title:  not yet sure that it is Aramis I am speaking to."
Title:  
Title:  "To himself, my friend, to himself!  But what makes you doubt
Title:  it?"
Title:  
Title:  "I was afraid I had made a mistake in the chamber, and that I had
Title:  found my way into the apartment of some churchman.  Then another
Title:  error seized me on seeing you in company with these gentlemen--I
Title:  was afraid you were dangerously ill."
Title:  
Title:  The two men in black, who guessed d'Artagnan's meaning, darted at
Title:  him a glance which might have been thought threatening; but
Title:  d'Artagnan took no heed of it.
Title:  
Title:  "I disturb you, perhaps, my dear Aramis," continued d'Artagnan,
Title:  "for by what I see, I am led to believe that you are confessing
Title:  to these gentlemen."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis colored imperceptibly.  "You disturb me?  Oh, quite the
Title:  contrary, dear friend, I swear; and as a proof of what I say,
Title:  permit me to declare I am rejoiced to see you safe and sound."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, he'll come round," thought d'Artagnan; "that's not bad!"
Title:  
Title:  "This gentleman, who is my friend, has just escaped from a
Title:  serious danger," continued Aramis, with unction, pointing to
Title:  d'Artagnan with his hand, and addressing the two ecclesiastics.
Title:  
Title:  "Praise God, monsieur," replied they, bowing together.
Title:  
Title:  "I have not failed to do so, your Reverences," replied the young
Title:  man, returning their salutation.
Title:  
Title:  "You arrive in good time, dear d'Artagnan," said Aramis, "and by
Title:  taking part in our discussion may assist us with your
Title:  intelligence.  Monsieur the Principal of Amiens, Monsieur the
Title:  Curate of Montdidier, and I are arguing certain theological
Title:  questions in which we have been much interested; I shall be
Title:  delighted to have your opinion."
Title:  
Title:  "The opinion of a swordsman can have very little weight," replied
Title:  d'Artagnan, who began to be uneasy at the turn things were
Title:  taking, "and you had better be satisfied, believe me, with the
Title:  knowledge of these gentlemen."
Title:  
Title:  The two men in black bowed in their turn.
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary," replied Aramis, "your opinion will be very
Title:  valuable.  The question is this:  Monsieur the Principal thinks
Title:  that my thesis ought to be dogmatic and didactic."
Title:  
Title:  "Your thesis!  Are you then making a thesis?"
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt," replied the Jesuit.  "In the examination which
Title:  precedes ordination, a thesis is always a requisite."
Title:  
Title:  "Ordination!" cried d'Artagnan, who could not believe what the
Title:  hostess and Bazin had successively told him; and he gazed, half
Title:  stupefied, upon the three persons before him.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," continued Aramis, taking the same graceful position in his
Title:  easy chair that he would have assumed in bed, and complacently
Title:  examining his hand, which was as white and plump as that of a
Title:  woman, and which he held in the air to cause the blood to
Title:  descend, "now, as you have heard, d'Artagnan, Monsieur the
Title:  Principal is desirous that my thesis should be dogmatic, while I,
Title:  for my part, would rather it should be ideal.  This is the reason
Title:  why Monsieur the Principal has proposed to me the following
Title:  subject, which has not yet been treated upon, and in which I
Title:  perceive there is matter for magnificent elaboration-'UTRAQUE
Title:  MANUS IN BENEDICENDO CLERICIS INFERIORIBUS NECESSARIA EST.'"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, whose erudition we are well acquainted with, evinced
Title:  no more interest on hearing this quotation than he had at that of
Title:  M. de Treville in allusion to the gifts he pretended that
Title:  d'Artagnan had received from the Duke of Buckingham.
Title:  
Title:  "Which means," resumed Aramis, that he might perfectly
Title:  understand, "'The two hands are indispensable for priests of the
Title:  inferior orders, when they bestow the benediction.'"
Title:  
Title:  "An admirable subject!" cried the Jesuit.
Title:  
Title:  "Admirable and dogmatic!" repeated the curate, who, about as
Title:  strong as d'Artagnan with respect to Latin, carefully watched the
Title:  Jesuit in order to keep step with him, and repeated his words
Title:  like an echo.
Title:  
Title:  As to d'Artagnan, he remained perfectly insensible to the
Title:  enthusiasm of the two men in black.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, admirable!  PRORSUS ADMIRABILE!" continued Aramis; "but
Title:  which requires a profound study of both the Scriptures and the
Title:  Fathers.  Now, I have confessed to these learned ecclesiastics,
Title:  and that in all humility, that the duties of mounting guard and
Title:  the service of the king have caused me to neglect study a little.
Title:  I should find myself, therefore, more at my ease, FACILUS NATANS,
Title:  in a subject of my own choice, which would be to these hard
Title:  theological questions what morals are to metaphysics in
Title:  philosophy."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan began to be tired, and so did the curate.
Title:  
Title:  "See what an exordium!" cried the Jesuit.
Title:  
Title:  "Exordium," repeated the curate, for the sake of saying
Title:  something.  "QUEMADMODUM INTER COELORUM IMMENSITATEM."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis cast a glance upon d'Artagnan to see what effect all this
Title:  produced, and found his friend gaping enough to split his jaws.
Title:  
Title:  "Let us speak French, my father," said he to the Jesuit;
Title:  "Monsieur d'Artagnan will enjoy our conversation better."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," replied d'Artagnan; "I am fatigued with reading, and all
Title:  this Latin confuses me."
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly," replied the Jesuit, a little put out, while the
Title:  curate, greatly delighted, turned upon d'Artagnan a look full of
Title:  gratitude.  "Well, let us see what is to be derived from this
Title:  gloss.  Moses, the servant of God-he was but a servant, please to
Title:  understand-Moses blessed with the hands; he held out both his
Title:  arms while the Hebrews beat their enemies, and then he blessed
Title:  them with his two hands.  Besides, what does the Gospel say?
Title:  IMPONITE MANUS, and not MANUM-place the HANDS, not the HAND."
Title:  
Title:  "Place the HANDS," repeated the curate, with a gesture.
Title:  
Title:  "St. Peter, on the contrary, of whom the Popes are the
Title:  successors," continued the Jesuit; "PORRIGE DIGITOS-present the
Title:  fingers.  Are you there, now?"
Title:  
Title:  "CERTES," replied Aramis, in a pleased tone, "but the thing is
Title:  subtle."
Title:  
Title:  "The FINGERS," resumed the Jesuit, "St. Peter blessed with the
Title:  FINGERS.  The Pope, therefore blesses with the fingers.  And with
Title:  how many fingers does he bless?  With THREE fingers, to be sure-
Title:  one for the Father, one for the Son, and one for the Holy Ghost."
Title:  
Title:  All crossed themselves.  D'Artagnan thought it was proper to
Title:  follow this example.
Title:  
Title:  "The Pope is the successor of St. Peter, and represents the three
Title:  divine powers; the rest-ORDINES INFERIORES-of the ecclesiastical
Title:  hierarchy bless in the name of the holy archangels and angels.
Title:  The most humble clerks such as our deacons and sacristans, bless
Title:  with holy water sprinklers, which resemble an infinite number of
Title:  blessing fingers.  There is the subject simplified.  ARGUMENTUM
Title:  OMNI DENUDATUM ORNAMENTO.  I could make of that subject two
Title:  volumes the size of this," continued the Jesuit; and in his
Title:  enthusiasm he struck a St. Chrysostom in folio, which made the
Title:  table bend beneath its weight.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan trembled.
Title:  
Title:  "CERTES," said Aramis, "I do justice to the beauties of this
Title:  thesis; but at the same time I perceive it would be overwhelming
Title:  for me.  I had chosen this text-tell me, dear d'Artagnan, if it
Title:  is not to your taste-'NON INUTILE EST DESIDERIUM IN OBLATIONE';
Title:  that is, 'A little regret is not unsuitable in an offering to the
Title:  Lord.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Stop there!" cried the Jesuit, "for that thesis touches closely
Title:  upon heresy.  There is a proposition almost like it in the
Title:  AUGUSTINUS of the heresiarch Jansenius, whose book will sooner or
Title:  later be burned by the hands of the executioner.  Take care, my
Title:  young friend.  You are inclining toward false doctrines, my young
Title:  friend; you will be lost."
Title:  
Title:  "You will be lost," said the curate, shaking his head
Title:  sorrowfully.
Title:  
Title:  "You approach that famous point of free will which is a mortal
Title:  rock.  You face the insinuations of the Pelagians and the semi-
Title:  Pelagians."
Title:  
Title:  "But, my Reverend-" replied Aramis, a little amazed by the shower
Title:  of arguments that poured upon his head.
Title:  
Title:  "How will you prove," continued the Jesuit, without allowing him
Title:  time to speak, "that we ought to regret the world when we offer
Title:  ourselves to God?  Listen to this dilemma: God is God, and the
Title:  world is the devil.  To regret the world is to regret the devil;
Title:  that is my conclusion."
Title:  
Title:  "And that is mine also," said the curate.
Title:  
Title:  "But, for heaven's sake-" resumed Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "DESIDERAS DIABOLUM, unhappy man!" cried the Jesuit.
Title:  
Title:  "He regrets the devil!  Ah, my young friend," added the curate,
Title:  groaning, "do not regret the devil, I implore you!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan felt himself bewildered.  It seemed to him as though
Title:  he were in a madhouse, and was becoming as mad as those he saw.
Title:  He was, however, forced to hold his tongue from not comprehending
Title:  half the language they employed.
Title:  
Title:  "But listen to me, then," resumed Aramis with politeness mingled
Title:  with a little impatience.  "I do not say I regret; no, I will
Title:  never pronounce that sentence, which would not be orthodox."
Title:  
Title:  The Jesuit raised his hands toward heaven, and the curate did the
Title:  same.
Title:  
Title:  "No; but pray grant me that it is acting with an ill grace to
Title:  offer to the Lord only that with which we are perfectly
Title:  disgusted!  Don't you think so, d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "I think so, indeed," cried he.
Title:  
Title:  The Jesuit and the curate quite started from their chairs.
Title:  
Title:  "This is the point of departure; it is a syllogism.  The world is
Title:  not wanting in attractions.  I quit the world; then I make a
Title:  sacrifice.  Now, the Scripture says positively, 'Make a sacrifice
Title:  unto the Lord.'"
Title:  
Title:  "That is true," said his antagonists.
Title:  
Title:  "And then," said Aramis, pinching his ear to make it red, as he
Title:  rubbed his hands to make them white, "and then I made a certain
Title:  RONDEAU upon it last year, which I showed to Monsieur Voiture,
Title:  and that great man paid me a thousand compliments."
Title:  
Title:  "A RONDEAU!" said the Jesuit, disdainfully.
Title:  
Title:  "A RONDEAU!" said the curate, mechanically.
Title:  
Title:  "Repeat it!  Repeat it!" cried d'Artagnan; "it will make a little
Title:  change."
Title:  
Title:  "Not so, for it is religious," replied Aramis; "it is theology in
Title:  verse."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Here it is," said Aramis, with a little look of diffidence,
Title:  which, however, was not exempt from a shade of hypocrisy:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Vous qui pleurez un passe plein de charmes,
Title:  Et qui trainez des jours infortunes,
Title:  Tous vos malheurs se verront termines,
Title:  Quand a Dieu seul vous offrirez vos larmes,
Title:  Vous qui pleurez!"
Title:  
Title:  "You who weep for pleasures fled,
Title:  While dragging on a life of care,
Title:  All your woes will melt in air,
Title:  If to God your tears are shed,
Title:  You who weep!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  d'Artagnan and the curate appeared pleased.  The Jesuit persisted
Title:  in his opinion.  "Beware of a profane taste in your theological
Title:  style.  What says Augustine on this subject:  'SEVERUS SIT
Title:  CLERICORUM VERBO.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, let the sermon be clear," said the curate.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," hastily interrupted the Jesuit, on seeing that his acolyte
Title:  was going astray, "now your thesis would please the ladies; it
Title:  would have the success of one of Monsieur Patru's pleadings."
Title:  
Title:  "Please God!" cried Aramis, transported.
Title:  
Title:  "There it is," cried the Jesuit; "the world still speaks within
Title:  you in a loud voice, ALTISIMMA VOCE.  You follow the world, my
Title:  young friend, and I tremble lest grace prove not efficacious."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied, my reverend father, I can answer for myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Mundane presumption!"
Title:  
Title:  "I know myself, Father; my resolution is irrevocable."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you persist in continuing that thesis?"
Title:  
Title:  "I feel myself called upon to treat that, and no other.  I will
Title:  see about the continuation of it, and tomorrow I hope you will be
Title:  satisfied with the corrections I shall have made in consequence
Title:  of your advice."
Title:  
Title:  "Work slowly," said the curate; "we leave you in an excellent
Title:  tone of mind."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, the ground is all sown," said the Jesuit, "and we have not
Title:  to fear that one portion of the seed may have fallen upon stone,
Title:  another upon the highway, or that the birds of heaven have eaten
Title:  the rest, AVES COELI COMEDERUNT ILLAM."
Title:  
Title:  "Plague stifle you and your Latin!" said d'Artagnan, who began to
Title:  feel all his patience exhausted.
Title:  
Title:  "Farewell, my son," said the curate, "till tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  "Till tomorrow, rash youth," said the Jesuit.  "You promise to
Title:  become one of the lights of the Church.  Heaven grant that this
Title:  light prove not a devouring fire!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, who for an hour past had been gnawing his nails with
Title:  impatience, was beginning to attack the quick.
Title:  
Title:  The two men in black rose, bowed to Aramis and d'Artagnan, and
Title:  advanced toward the door.  Bazin, who had been standing listening
Title:  to all this controversy with a pious jubilation, sprang toward
Title:  them, took the breviary of the curate and the missal of the
Title:  Jesuit, and walked respectfully before them to clear their way.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis conducted them to the foot of the stairs, and then
Title:  immediately came up again to d'Artagnan, whose senses were still
Title:  in a state of confusion.
Title:  
Title:  When left alone, the two friends at first kept an embarrassed
Title:  silence.  It however became necessary for one of them to break it
Title:  first, and as d'Artagnan appeared determined to leave that honor
Title:  to his companion, Aramis said, "you see that I am returned to my
Title:  fundamental ideas."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, efficacious grace has touched you, as that gentleman said
Title:  just now."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, these plans of retreat have been formed for a long time.
Title:  You have often heard me speak of them, have you not, my friend?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but I confess I always thought you jested."
Title:  
Title:  "With such things!  Oh, d'Artagnan!"
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  Why, people jest with death."
Title:  
Title:  "And people are wrong, d'Artagnan; for death is the door which
Title:  leads to perdition or to salvation."
Title:  
Title:  "Granted; but if you please, let us not theologize, Aramis.  You
Title:  must have had enough for today.  As for me, I have almost
Title:  forgotten the little Latin I have ever known.  Then I confess to
Title:  you that I have eaten nothing since ten o'clock this morning, and
Title:  I am devilish hungry."
Title:  
Title:  "We will dine directly, my friend; only you must please to
Title:  remember that this is Friday.  Now, on such a day I can neither
Title:  eat flesh nor see it eaten.  If you can be satisfied with my
Title:  dinner-it consists of cooked tetragones and fruits."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean by tetragones?" asked d'Artagnan, uneasily.
Title:  
Title:  "I mean spinach," replied Aramis; "but on your account I will add
Title:  some eggs, and that is a serious infraction of the rule-for eggs
Title:  are meat, since they engender chickens."
Title:  
Title:  "This feast is not very succulent; but never mind, I will put up
Title:  with it for the sake of remaining with you."
Title:  
Title:  "I am grateful to you for the sacrifice," said Aramis; "but if
Title:  your body be not greatly benefited by it, be assured your soul
Title:  will."
Title:  
Title:  "And so, Aramis, you are decidedly going into the Church?  What
Title:  will our two friends say?  What will Monsieur de Treville say?
Title:  They will treat you as a deserter, I warn you."
Title:  
Title:  "I do not enter the Church; I re-enter it.  I deserted the Church
Title:  for the world, for you know that I forced myself when I became a
Title:  Musketeer."
Title:  
Title:  "I?  I know nothing about it."
Title:  
Title:  "You don't know I quit the seminary?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not at all."
Title:  
Title:  "This is my story, then.  Besides, the Scriptures say, 'Confess
Title:  yourselves to one another,' and I confess to you, d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "And I give you absolution beforehand.  You see I am a good sort
Title:  of a man."
Title:  
Title:  "Do not jest about holy things, my friend."
Title:  
Title:  "Go on, then, I listen."
Title:  
Title:  "I had been at the seminary from nine years old; in three days I
Title:  should have been twenty.  I was about to become an abbe, and all
Title:  was arranged.  One evening I went, according to custom, to a
Title:  house which I frequented with much pleasure:  when one is young,
Title:  what can be expected?--one is weak.  An officer who saw me, with
Title:  a jealous eye, reading the LIVES OF THE SAINTS to the mistress of
Title:  the house, entered suddenly and without being announced.  That
Title:  evening I had translated an episode of Judith, and had just
Title:  communicated my verses to the lady, who gave me all sorts of
Title:  compliments, and leaning on my shoulder, was reading them a
Title:  second time with me.  Her pose, which I must admit was rather
Title:  free, wounded this officer.  He said nothing; but when I went out
Title:  he followed, and quickly came up with me.  'Monsieur the Abbe,'
Title:  said he, 'do you like blows with a cane?' 'I cannot say,
Title:  monsieur,' answered I; 'no one has ever dared to give me any.'
Title:  'Well, listen to me, then, Monsieur the Abbe!  If you venture
Title:  again into the house in which I have met you this evening, I will
Title:  dare it myself.'  I really think I must have been frightened.  I
Title:  became very pale; I felt my legs fail me; I sought for a reply,
Title:  but could find none-I was silent.  The officer waited for his
Title:  reply, and seeing it so long coming, he burst into a laugh,
Title:  turned upon his heel, and re-entered the house.  I returned to
Title:  the seminary.
Title:  
Title:  "I am a gentleman born, and my blood is warm, as you may have
Title:  remarked, my dear d'Artagnan.  The insult was terrible, and
Title:  although unknown to the rest of the world, I felt it live and
Title:  fester at the bottom of my heart.  I informed my superiors that I
Title:  did not feel myself sufficiently prepared for ordination, and at
Title:  my request the ceremony was postponed for a year.  I sought out
Title:  the best fencing master in Paris, I made an agreement with him to
Title:  take a lesson every day, and every day for a year I took that
Title:  lesson.  Then, on the anniversary of the day on which I had been
Title:  insulted, I hung my cassock on a peg, assumed the costume of a
Title:  cavalier, and went to a ball given by a lady friend of mine and
Title:  to which I knew my man was invited.  It was in the Rue des
Title:  France-Bourgeois, close to La Force.  As I expected, my officer
Title:  was there.  I went up to him as he was singing a love ditty and
Title:  looking tenderly at a lady, and interrupted him exactly in the
Title:  middle of the second couplet.  'Monsieur,' said I, 'does it still
Title:  displease you that I should frequent a certain house of La Rue
Title:  Payenne?  And would you still cane me if I took it into my head
Title:  to disobey you?  The officer looked at me with astonishment, and
Title:  then said, 'What is your business with me, monsieur?  I do not
Title:  know you.'  'I am,' said I, 'the little abbe who reads LIVES OF
Title:  THE SAINTS, and translates Judith into verse.'  'Ah, ah!  I
Title:  recollect now,' said the officer, in a jeering tone; 'well, what
Title:  do you want with me?'  'I want you to spare time to take a walk
Title:  with me.'  'Tomorrow morning, if you like, with the greatest
Title:  pleasure.'  'No, not tomorrow morning, if you please, but
Title:  immediately.'  'If you absolutely insist.'  'I do insist upon
Title:  it.'  'Come, then.  Ladies,' said the officer, 'do not disturb
Title:  yourselves; allow me time just to kill this gentleman, and I will
Title:  return and finish the last couplet.'
Title:  
Title:  "We went out.  I took him to the Rue Payenne, to exactly the same
Title:  spot where, a year before, at the very same hour, he had paid me
Title:  the compliment I have related to you.  It was a superb moonlight
Title:  night.  We immediately drew, and at the first pass I laid him
Title:  stark dead."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," continued Aramis, "as the ladies did not see the singer
Title:  come back, and as he was found in the Rue Payenne with a great
Title:  sword wound through his body, it was supposed that I had
Title:  accommodated him thus; and the matter created some scandal which
Title:  obliged me to renounce the cassock for a time.  Athos, whose
Title:  acquaintance I made about that period, and Porthos, who had in
Title:  addition to my lessons taught me some effective tricks of fence,
Title:  prevailed upon me to solicit the uniform of a Musketeer.  The
Title:  king entertained great regard for my father, who had fallen at
Title:  the siege of Arras, and the uniform was granted.  You may understand
Title:  that the moment has come for me to re-enter the bosom of the
Title:  Church."
Title:  
Title:  "And why today, rather than yesterday or tomorrow?  What has
Title:  happened to you today, to raise all these melancholy ideas?"
Title:  
Title:  "This wound, my dear d'Artagnan, has been a warning to me from
Title:  heaven."
Title:  
Title:  "This wound?  Bah, it is now nearly healed, and I am sure it is
Title:  not that which gives you the most pain."
Title:  
Title:  "What, then?" said Aramis, blushing.
Title:  
Title:  "You have one at heart, Aramis, one deeper and more painful--a
Title:  wound made by a woman."
Title:  
Title:  The eye of Aramis kindled in spite of himself.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said he, dissembling his emotion under a feigned
Title:  carelessness, "do not talk of such things, and suffer love pains?
Title:  VANITAS VANITATUM!  According to your idea, then, my brain is
Title:  turned.  And for whom-for some GRISETTE, some chambermaid with
Title:  whom I have trifled in some garrison?  Fie!"
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon, my dear Aramis, but I thought you carried your eyes
Title:  higher."
Title:  
Title:  "Higher?  And who am I, to nourish such ambition?  A poor
Title:  Musketeer, a beggar, an unknown-who hates slavery, and finds
Title:  himself ill-placed in the world."
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis, Aramis!" cried d'Artagnan, looking at his friend with an
Title:  air of doubt.
Title:  
Title:  "Dust I am, and to dust I return.  Life is full of humiliations
Title:  and sorrows," continued he, becoming still more melancholy; "all
Title:  the ties which attach him to life break in the hand of man,
Title:  particularly the golden ties.  Oh, my dear d'Artagnan," resumed
Title:  Aramis, giving to his voice a slight tone of bitterness, "trust
Title:  me!  Conceal your wounds when you have any; silence is the last
Title:  joy of the unhappy.  Beware of giving anyone the clue to your
Title:  griefs; the curious suck our tears as flies suck the blood of a
Title:  wounded hart."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, my dear Aramis," said d'Artagnan, in his turn heaving a
Title:  profound sigh, "that is my story you are relating!"
Title:  
Title:  "How?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; a woman whom I love, whom I adore, has just been torn from
Title:  me by force.  I do not know where she is or whither they have
Title:  conducted her.  She is perhaps a prisoner; she is perhaps dead!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but you have at least this consolation, that you can say to
Title:  yourself she has not quit you voluntarily, that if you learn no
Title:  news of her, it is because all communication with you is
Title:  interdicted; while I--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing," replied Aramis, "nothing."
Title:  
Title:  "So you renounce the world, then, forever; that is a settled
Title:  thing--a resolution registered!"
Title:  
Title:  "Forever!  You are my friend today; tomorrow you will be no more
Title:  to me than a shadow, or rather, even, you will no longer exist.
Title:  As for the world, it is a sepulcher and nothing else."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  All this is very sad which you tell me."
Title:  
Title:  "What will you?  My vocation commands me; it carries me away."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan smiled, but made no answer.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis continued, "And yet, while I do belong to the earth, I
Title:  wish to speak of you--of our friends."
Title:  
Title:  "And on my part," said d'Artagnan, "I wished to speak of you, but
Title:  I find you so completely detached from everything!  To love you
Title:  cry, 'Fie!  Friends are shadows!  The world is a sepulcher!'"
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, you will find it so yourself," said Aramis, with a sigh.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, let us say no more about it," said d'Artagnan; "and
Title:  let us burn this letter, which, no doubt, announces to you some
Title:  fresh infidelity of your GRISETTE or your chambermaid."
Title:  
Title:  "What letter?" cried Aramis, eagerly.
Title:  
Title:  "A letter which was sent to your abode in your absence, and which
Title:  was given to me for you."
Title:  
Title:  "But from whom is that letter?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, from some heartbroken waiting woman, some desponding
Title:  GRISETTE; from Madame de Chevreuse's chambermaid, perhaps, who
Title:  was obliged to return to Tours with her mistress, and who, in
Title:  order to appear smart and attractive, stole some perfumed paper,
Title:  and sealed her letter with a duchess's coronet."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "Hold!  I must have lost it,"  said the young man maliciously,
Title:  pretending to search for it.  "But fortunately the world is a
Title:  sepulcher; the men, and consequently the women, are but shadows,
Title:  and love is a sentiment to which you cry, 'Fie!  Fie!'"
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan, d'Artagnan," cried Aramis, "you are killing me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, here it is at last!" said d'Artagnan, as he drew the
Title:  letter from his pocket.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis made a bound, seized the letter, read it, or rather
Title:  devoured it, his countenance radiant.
Title:  
Title:  "This same waiting maid seems to have an agreeable style," said
Title:  the messenger, carelessly.
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, d'Artagnan, thanks!" cried Aramis, almost in a state of
Title:  delirium.  "She was forced to return to Tours; she is not
Title:  faithless; she still loves me!  Come, my friend, come, let me
Title:  embrace you.  Happiness almost stifles me!"
Title:  
Title:  The two friends began to dance around the venerable St.
Title:  Chrysostom, kicking about famously the sheets of the thesis,
Title:  which had fallen on the floor.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment Bazin entered with the spinach and the omelet.
Title:  
Title:  "Be off, you wretch!" cried Aramis, throwing his skullcap in his
Title:  face.  "Return whence you came; take back those horrible
Title:  vegetables, and that poor kickshaw!  Order a larded hare, a fat
Title:  capon, mutton leg dressed with garlic, and four bottles of old
Title:  Burgundy."
Title:  
Title:  Bazin, who looked at his master, without comprehending the cause
Title:  of this change, in a melancholy manner, allowed the omelet to
Title:  slip into the spinach, and the spinach onto the floor.
Title:  
Title:  "Now this is the moment to consecrate your existence to the King
Title:  of kings," said d'Artagnan, "if you persist in offering him a
Title:  civility.  NON INUTILE DESIDERIUM OBLATIONE."
Title:  
Title:  "Go to the devil with your Latin.  Let us drink, my dear
Title:  d'Artagnan, MORBLEU!  Let us drink while the wine is fresh!  Let
Title:  us drink heartily, and while we do so, tell me a little of what
Title:  is going on in the world yonder."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  27  THE WIFE OF ATHOS
Title:  
Title:  "We have now to search for Athos," said d'Artagnan to the
Title:  vivacious Aramis, when he had informed him of all that had passed
Title:  since their departure from the capital, and an excellent dinner
Title:  had made one of them forget his thesis and the other his fatigue.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you think, then, that any harm can have happened to him?"
Title:  asked Aramis.  "Athos is so cool, so brave, and handles his sword
Title:  so skillfully."
Title:  
Title:  "No doubt.  Nobody has a higher opinion of the courage and skill
Title:  of Athos than I have; but I like better to hear my sword clang
Title:  against lances than against staves.  I fear lest Athos should
Title:  have been beaten down by serving men.  Those fellows strike hard,
Title:  and don't leave off in a hurry.  This is why I wish to set out
Title:  again as soon as possible."
Title:  
Title:  "I will try to accompany you," said Aramis, "though I scarcely
Title:  feel in a condition to mount on horseback.  Yesterday I undertook
Title:  to employ that cord which you see hanging against the wall, but
Title:  pain prevented my continuing the pious exercise."
Title:  
Title:  "That's the first time I ever heard of anybody trying to cure
Title:  gunshot wounds with cat-o'-nine-tails; but you were ill, and
Title:  illness renders the head weak, therefore you may be excused."
Title:  
Title:  "When do you mean to set out?"
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow at daybreak.  Sleep as soundly as you can tonight, and
Title:  tomorrow, if you can, we will take our departure together."
Title:  
Title:  "Till tomorrow, then," said Aramis; "for iron-nerved as you are,
Title:  you must need repose."
Title:  
Title:  The next morning, when d'Artagnan entered Aramis's chamber, he
Title:  found him at the window.
Title:  
Title:  "What are you looking at?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!  I am admiring three magnificent horses which the
Title:  stable boys are leading about.  It would be a pleasure worthy of
Title:  a prince to travel upon such horses."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, my dear Aramis, you may enjoy that pleasure, for one of
Title:  those three horses is yours."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, bah!  Which?"
Title:  
Title:  "Whichever of the three you like, I have no preference."
Title:  
Title:  "And the rich caparison, is that mine, too?"
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt."
Title:  
Title:  "You laugh, d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "No, I have left off laughing, now that you speak French."
Title:  
Title:  "What, those rich holsters, that velvet housing, that saddle
Title:  studded with silver-are they all for me?"
Title:  
Title:  "For you and nobody else, as the horse which paws the ground is
Title:  mine, and the other horse, which is caracoling, belongs to
Title:  Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "PESTE!  They are three superb animals!"
Title:  
Title:  "I am glad they please you."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, it must have been the king who made you such a present."
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly it was not the cardinal; but don't trouble yourself
Title:  whence they come, think only that one of the three is your
Title:  property."
Title:  
Title:  "I choose that which the red-headed boy is leading."
Title:  
Title:  "It is yours!"
Title:  
Title:  "Good heaven!  That is enough to drive away all my pains; I could
Title:  mount him with thirty balls in my body.  On my soul, handsome
Title:  stirrups!  HOLA, Bazin, come here this minute."
Title:  
Title:  Bazin appeared on the threshold, dull and spiritless.
Title:  
Title:  "That last order is useless," interrupted d'Artagnan; "there are
Title:  loaded pistols in your holsters."
Title:  
Title:  Bazin sighed.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, Monsieur Bazin, make yourself easy," said d'Artagnan;
Title:  "people of all conditions gain the kingdom of heaven."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur was already such a good theologian," said Bazin, almost
Title:  weeping; "he might have become a bishop, and perhaps a cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but my poor Bazin, reflect a little.  Of what use is it to
Title:  be a churchman, pray?  You do not avoid going to war by that
Title:  means; you see, the cardinal is about to make the next campaign,
Title:  helm on head and partisan in hand.  And Monsieur de Nogaret de la
Title:  Valette, what do you say of him?  He is a cardinal likewise.  Ask
Title:  his lackey how often he has had to prepare lint of him."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas!" sighed Bazin.  "I know it, monsieur; everything is turned
Title:  topsy-turvy in the world nowadays."
Title:  
Title:  While this dialogue was going on, the two young men and the poor
Title:  lackey descended.
Title:  
Title:  "Hold my stirrup, Bazin," cried Aramis; and Aramis sprang into
Title:  the saddle with his usual grace and agility, but after a few
Title:  vaults and curvets of the noble animal his rider felt his pains
Title:  come on so insupportably that he turned pale and became unsteady
Title:  in his seat.  D'Artagnan, who, foreseeing such an event, had kept
Title:  his eye on him, sprang toward him, caught him in his arms, and
Title:  assisted him to his chamber.
Title:  
Title:  "That's all right, my dear Aramis, take care of yourself," said
Title:  he; "I will go alone in search of Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "You are a man of brass," replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "No, I have good luck, that is all.  But how do you mean to pass
Title:  your time till I come back?  No more theses, no more glosses upon
Title:  the fingers or upon benedictions, hey?"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis smiled.  "I will make verses," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I dare say; verses perfumed with the odor of the billet
Title:  from the attendant of Madame de Chevreuse.  Teach Bazin prosody;
Title:  that will console him.  As to the horse, ride him a little every
Title:  day, and that will accustom you to his maneuvers."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, make yourself easy on that head," replied Aramis.  "You will
Title:  find me ready to follow you."
Title:  
Title:  They took leave of each other, and in ten minutes, after having
Title:  commended his friend to the cares of the hostess and Bazin,
Title:  d'Artagnan was trotting along in the direction of Amiens.
Title:  
Title:  How was he going to find Athos?  Should he find him at all?  The
Title:  position in which he had left him was critical.  He probably had
Title:  succumbed.  This idea, while darkening his brow, drew several
Title:  sighs from him, and caused him to formulate to himself a few vows
Title:  of vengeance.  Of all his friends, Athos was the eldest, and the
Title:  least resembling him in appearance, in his tastes and sympathies.
Title:  
Title:  Yet he entertained a marked preference for this gentleman.  The
Title:  noble and distinguished air of Athos, those flashes of greatness
Title:  which from time to time broke out from the shade in which he
Title:  voluntarily kept himself, that unalterable equality of temper
Title:  which made him the most pleasant companion in the world, that
Title:  forced and cynical gaiety, that bravery which might have been
Title:  termed blind if it had not been the result of the rarest
Title:  coolness--such qualities attracted more than the esteem, more than
Title:  the friendship of d'Artagnan; they attracted his admiration.
Title:  
Title:  Indeed, when placed beside M. de Treville, the elegant and noble
Title:  courtier, Athos in his most cheerful days might advantageously
Title:  sustain a comparison.  He was of middle height; but his person
Title:  was so admirably shaped and so well proportioned that more than
Title:  once in his struggles with Porthos he had overcome the giant
Title:  whose physical strength was proverbial among the Musketeers.  His
Title:  head, with piercing eyes, a straight nose, a chin cut like that
Title:  of Brutus, had altogether an indefinable character of grandeur
Title:  and grace.  His hands, of which he took little care, were the
Title:  despair of Aramis, who cultivated his with almond paste and
Title:  perfumed oil.  The sound of his voice was at once penetrating and
Title:  melodious; and then, that which was inconceivable in Athos, who
Title:  was always retiring, was that delicate knowledge of the world and
Title:  of the usages of the most brilliant society--those manners of a
Title:  high degree which appeared, as if unconsciously to himself, in
Title:  his least actions.
Title:  
Title:  If a repast were on foot, Athos presided over it better than any
Title:  other, placing every guest exactly in the rank which his
Title:  ancestors had earned for him or that he had made for himself.  If
Title:  a question in heraldry were started, Athos knew all the noble
Title:  families of the kingdom, their genealogy, their alliances, their
Title:  coats of arms, and the origin of them.  Etiquette had no minutiae
Title:  unknown to him.  He knew what were the rights of the great land
Title:  owners.  He was profoundly versed in hunting and falconry, and
Title:  had one day when conversing on this great art astonished even
Title:  Louis XIII himself, who took a pride in being considered a past
Title:  master therein.
Title:  
Title:  Like all the great nobles of that period, Athos rode and fenced
Title:  to perfection.  But still further, his education had been so
Title:  little neglected, even with respect to scholastic studies, so
Title:  rare at this time among gentlemen, that he smiled at the scraps
Title:  of Latin which Aramis sported and which Porthos pretended to
Title:  understand.  Two or three times, even, to the great astonishment
Title:  of his friends, he had, when Aramis allowed some rudimental error
Title:  to escape him, replaced a verb in its right tense and a noun in
Title:  its case.  Besides, his probity was irreproachable, in an age in
Title:  which soldiers compromised so easily with their religion and
Title:  their consciences, lovers with the rigorous delicacy of our era,
Title:  and the poor with God's Seventh Commandment.  This Athos, then,
Title:  was a very extraordinary man.
Title:  
Title:  And yet this nature so distinguished, this creature so beautiful,
Title:  this essence so fine, was seen to turn insensibly toward material
Title:  life, as old men turn toward physical and moral imbecility.
Title:  Athos, in his hours of gloom--and these hours were frequent--was
Title:  extinguished as to the whole of the luminous portion of him, and
Title:  his brilliant side disappeared as into profound darkness.
Title:  
Title:  Then the demigod vanished; he remained scarcely a man.  His head
Title:  hanging down, his eye dull, his speech slow and painful, Athos
Title:  would look for hours together at his bottle, his glass, or at
Title:  Grimaud, who, accustomed to obey him by signs, read in the faint
Title:  glance of his master his least desire, and satisfied it
Title:  immediately.  If the four friends were assembled at one of these
Title:  moments, a word, thrown forth occasionally with a violent effort,
Title:  was the share Athos furnished to the conversation.  In exchange
Title:  for his silence Athos drank enough for four, and without
Title:  appearing to be otherwise affected by wine than by a more marked
Title:  constriction of the brow and by a deeper sadness.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, whose inquiring disposition we are acquainted with,
Title:  had not--whatever interest he had in satisfying his curiosity on
Title:  this subject--been able to assign any cause for these fits of for
Title:  the periods of their recurrence.  Athos never received any
Title:  letters; Athos never had concerns which all his friends did not
Title:  know.
Title:  
Title:  It could not be said that it was wine which produced this
Title:  sadness; for in truth he only drank to combat this sadness, which
Title:  wine however, as we have said, rendered still darker.  This
Title:  excess of bilious humor could not be attributed to play; for
Title:  unlike Porthos, who accompanied the variations of chance with
Title:  songs or oaths, Athos when he won remained as unmoved as when he
Title:  lost.  He had been known, in the circle of the Musketeers, to win
Title:  in one night three thousand pistoles; to lose them even to the
Title:  gold-embroidered belt for gala days, win all this again with the
Title:  addition of a hundred louis, without his beautiful eyebrow being
Title:  heightened or lowered half a line, without his hands losing their
Title:  pearly hue, without his conversation, which was cheerful that
Title:  evening, ceasing to be calm and agreeable.
Title:  
Title:  Neither was it, as with our neighbors, the English, an
Title:  atmospheric influence which darkened his countenance; for the
Title:  sadness generally became more intense toward the fine season of
Title:  the year.  June and July were the terrible months with Athos.
Title:  
Title:  For the present he had no anxiety.  He shrugged his shoulders
Title:  when people spoke of the future.  His secret, then, was in the
Title:  past, as had often been vaguely said to d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  This mysterious shade, spread over his whole person, rendered
Title:  still more interesting the man whose eyes or mouth, even in the
Title:  most complete intoxication, had never revealed anything, however
Title:  skillfully questions had been put to him.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," thought d'Artagnan, "poor Athos is perhaps at this moment
Title:  dead, and dead by my fault--for it was I who dragged him into this
Title:  affair, of which he did not know the origin, of which he is
Title:  ignorant of the result, and from which he can derive no
Title:  advantage."
Title:  
Title:  "Without reckoning, monsieur," added Planchet to his master's
Title:  audibly expressed reflections, "that we perhaps owe our lives to
Title:  him.  Do you remember how he cried, 'On, d'Artagnan, on, I am
Title:  taken'?  And when he had discharged his two pistols, what a
Title:  terrible noise he made with his sword!  One might have said that
Title:  twenty men, or rather twenty mad devils, were fighting."
Title:  
Title:  These words redoubled the eagerness of d'Artagnan, who urged his
Title:  horse, though he stood in need of no incitement, and they
Title:  proceeded at a rapid pace.  About eleven o'clock in the morning
Title:  they perceived Ameins, and at half past eleven they were at the
Title:  door of the cursed inn.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had often meditated against the perfidious host one of
Title:  those hearty vengeances which offer consolation while they are
Title:  hoped for.  He entered the hostelry with his hat pulled over his
Title:  eyes, his left hand on the pommel of the sword, and cracking his
Title:  whip with his right hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you remember me?" said he to the host, who advanced to greet
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  "I have not that honor, monseigneur," replied the latter, his
Title:  eyes dazzled by the brilliant style in which d'Artagnan traveled.
Title:  
Title:  "What, you don't know me?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, two words will refresh your memory.  What have you done
Title:  with that gentleman against whom you had the audacity, about
Title:  twelve days ago, to make an accusation of passing false money?"
Title:  
Title:  The host became as pale as death; for d'Artagnan had assumed a
Title:  threatening attitude, and Planchet modeled himself after his
Title:  master.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monseigneur, do not mention it!" cried the host, in the most
Title:  pitiable voice imaginable.  "Ah, monseigneur, how dearly have I
Title:  paid for that fault, unhappy wretch as I am!"
Title:  
Title:  "That gentleman, I say, what has become of him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Deign to listen to me, monseigneur, and be merciful!  Sit down,
Title:  in mercy!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, mute with anger and anxiety, took a seat in the
Title:  threatening attitude of a judge.  Planchet glared fiercely over
Title:  the back of his armchair.
Title:  
Title:  "Here is the story, monseigneur," resumed the trembling host;
Title:  "for I now recollect you.  It was you who rode off at the moment
Title:  I had that unfortunate difference with the gentleman you speak
Title:  of."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, it was I; so you may plainly perceive that you have no
Title:  mercy to expect if you do not tell me the whole truth."
Title:  
Title:  "Condescend to listen to me, and you shall know all."
Title:  
Title:  "I listen."
Title:  
Title:  "I had been warned by the authorities that a celebrated coiner of
Title:  bad money would arrive at my inn, with several of his companions,
Title:  all disguised as Guards or Musketeers.  Monseigneur, I was
Title:  furnished with a description of your horses, your lackeys, your
Title:  countenances--nothing was omitted."
Title:  
Title:  "Go on, go on!" said d'Artagnan, who quickly understood whence
Title:  such an exact description had come.
Title:  
Title:  "I took then, in conformity with the orders of the authorities,
Title:  who sent me a reinforcement of six men, such measures as I
Title:  thought necessary to get possession of the persons of the
Title:  pretended coiners."
Title:  
Title:  "Again!" said d'Artagnan, whose ears chafed terribly under the
Title:  repetition of this word COINERs.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon me, monseigneur, for saying such things, but they form my
Title:  excuse.  The authorities had terrified me, and you know that an
Title:  innkeeper must keep on good terms with the authorities."
Title:  
Title:  "But once again, that gentleman--where is he?  What has become of
Title:  him?  Is he dead?  Is he living?"
Title:  
Title:  "Patience, monseigneur, we are coming to it.  There happened then
Title:  that which you know, and of which your precipitate departure,"
Title:  added the host, with an acuteness that did not escape d'Artagnan,
Title:  "appeared to authorize the issue.  That gentleman, your friend,
Title:  defended himself desperately.  His lackey, who, by an unforeseen
Title:  piece of ill luck, had quarreled with the officers, disguised as
Title:  stable lads--"
Title:  
Title:  "Miserable scoundrel!" cried d'Artagnan, "you were all in the
Title:  plot, then!  And I really don't know what prevents me from
Title:  exterminating you all."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, monseigneur, we were not in the plot, as you will soon
Title:  see.  Monsieur your friend (pardon for not calling him by the
Title:  honorable name which no doubt he bears, but we do not know that
Title:  name), Monsieur your friend, having disabled two men with his
Title:  pistols, retreated fighting with his sword, with which he disabled
Title:  one of my men, and stunned me with a blow of the flat side of
Title:  it."
Title:  
Title:  "You villain, will you finish?" cried d'Artagnan, "Athos--what has
Title:  become of Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "While fighting and retreating, as I have told Monseigneur, he
Title:  found the door of the cellar stairs behind him, and as the door
Title:  was open, he took out the key, and barricaded himself inside.  As
Title:  we were sure of finding him there, we left him alone."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said d'Artagnan, "you did not really wish to kill; you
Title:  only wished to imprison him."
Title:  
Title:  "Good God!  To imprison him, monseigneur?  Why, he imprisoned
Title:  himself, I swear to you he did.  In the first place he had made
Title:  rough work of it; one man was killed on the spot, and two others
Title:  were severely wounded.  The dead man and the two wounded were
Title:  carried off by their comrades, and I have heard nothing of either
Title:  of them since.  As for myself, as soon as I recovered my senses I
Title:  went to Monsieur the Governor, to whom I related all that had
Title:  passed, and asked, what I should do with my prisoner.  Monsieur
Title:  the Governor was all astonishment.  He told me he knew nothing
Title:  about the matter, that the orders I had received did not come
Title:  from him, and that if I had the audacity to mention his name as
Title:  being concerned in this disturbance he would have me hanged.  It
Title:  appears that I had made a mistake, monsieur, that I had arrested
Title:  the wrong person, and that he whom I ought to have arrested had
Title:  escaped."
Title:  
Title:  "But Athos!" cried d'Artagnan, whose impatience was increased by
Title:  the disregard of the authorities, "Athos, where is he?"
Title:  
Title:  "As I was anxious to repair the wrongs I had done the prisoner,"
Title:  resumed the innkeeper, "I took my way straight to the cellar in
Title:  order to set him at liberty.  Ah, monsieur, he was no longer a
Title:  man, he was a devil!  To my offer of liberty, he replied that it
Title:  was nothing but a snare, and that before he came out he intended
Title:  to impose his own conditions.  I told him very humbly--for I could
Title:  not conceal from myself the scrape I had got into by laying hands
Title:  on one of his Majesty's Musketeers--I told him I was quite ready
Title:  to submit to his conditions.
Title:  
Title:  "'In the first place,' said he, 'I wish my lackey placed with me,
Title:  fully armed.'  We hastened to obey this order; for you will
Title:  please to understand, monsieur, we were disposed to do everything
Title:  your friend could desire.  Monsieur Grimaud (he told us his name,
Title:  although he does not talk much)--Monsieur Grimaud, then, went down
Title:  to the cellar, wounded as he was; then his master, having
Title:  admitted him, barricaded the door afresh, and ordered us to
Title:  remain quietly in our own bar."
Title:  
Title:  "But where is Athos now?" cried d'Artagnan.  "Where is Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "In the cellar, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "What, you scoundrel!  Have you kept him in the cellar all this
Title:  time?"
Title:  
Title:  "Merciful heaven!  No, monsieur!  We keep him in the cellar!  You
Title:  do not know what he is about in the cellar.  Ah!  If you could
Title:  but persuade him to come out, monsieur, I should owe you the
Title:  gratitude of my whole life; I should adore you as my patron
Title:  saint!"
Title:  
Title:  "Then he is there?  I shall find him there?"
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt you will, monsieur; he persists in remaining
Title:  there.  We every day pass through the air hole some bread at the
Title:  end of a fork, and some meat when he asks for it; but alas!  It
Title:  is not of bread and meat of which he makes the greatest
Title:  consumption.  I once endeavored to go down with two of my
Title:  servants; but he flew into terrible rage.  I heard the noise he
Title:  made in loading his pistols, and his servant in loading his
Title:  musketoon.  Then, when we asked them what were their intentions,
Title:  the master replied that he had forty charges to fire, and that he
Title:  and his lackey would fire to the last one before he would allow a
Title:  single soul of us to set foot in the cellar.  Upon this I went
Title:  and complained to the governor, who replied that I only had what
Title:  I deserved, and that it would teach me to insult honorable
Title:  gentlemen who took up their abode in my house."
Title:  
Title:  "So that since that time--" replied d'Artagnan, totally unable to
Title:  refrain from laughing at the pitiable face of the host.
Title:  
Title:  "So from that time, monsieur," continued the latter, "we have led
Title:  the most miserable life imaginable; for you must know, monsieur,
Title:  that all our provisions are in the cellar.  There is our wine in
Title:  bottles, and our wine in casks; the beer, the oil, and the
Title:  spices, the bacon, and sausages.  And as we are prevented from
Title:  going down there, we are forced to refuse food and drink to the
Title:  travelers who come to the house; so that our hostelry is daily
Title:  going to ruin.  If your friend remains another week in my cellar
Title:  I shall be a ruined man."
Title:  
Title:  "And not more than justice, either, you ass!  Could you not
Title:  perceive by our appearance that we were people of quality, and
Title:  not coiners--say?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur, you are right," said the host.  "But, hark, hark!
Title:  There he is!"
Title:  
Title:  "Somebody has disturbed him, without doubt," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "But he must be disturbed," cried the host; "Here are two English
Title:  gentlemen just arrived."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, the English like good wine, as you may know, monsieur;
Title:  these have asked for the best.  My wife has perhaps requested
Title:  permission of Monsieur Athos to go into the cellar to satisfy
Title:  these gentlemen; and he, as usual, has refused.  Ah, good heaven!
Title:  There is the hullabaloo louder than ever!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, in fact, heard a great noise on the side next the
Title:  cellar.  He rose, and preceded by the host wringing his hands,
Title:  and followed by Planchet with his musketoon ready for use, he
Title:  approached the scene of action.
Title:  
Title:  The two gentlemen were exasperated; they had had a long ride, and
Title:  were dying with hunger and thirst.
Title:  
Title:  "But this is tyranny!" cried one of them, in very good French,
Title:  though with a foreign accent, "that this madman will not allow
Title:  these good people access to their own wine!  Nonsense, let us
Title:  break open the door, and if he is too far gone in his madness,
Title:  well, we will kill him!"
Title:  
Title:  "Softly, gentlemen!" said d'Artagnan, drawing his pistols from
Title:  his belt, "you will kill nobody, if you please!"
Title:  
Title:  "Good, good!" cried the calm voice of Athos, from the other side
Title:  of the door, "let them just come in, these devourers of little
Title:  children, and we shall see!"
Title:  
Title:  Brave as they appeared to be, the two English gentlemen looked at
Title:  each other hesitatingly.  One might have thought there was in
Title:  that cellar one of those famished ogres--the gigantic heroes of
Title:  popular legends, into whose cavern nobody could force their way
Title:  with impunity.
Title:  
Title:  There was a moment of silence; but at length the two Englishmen
Title:  felt ashamed to draw back, and the angrier one descended the five
Title:  or six steps which led to the cellar, and gave a kick against the
Title:  door enough to split a wall.
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet," said d'Artagnan, cocking his pistols, "I will take
Title:  charge of the one at the top; you look to the one below.  Ah,
Title:  gentlemen, you want battle; and you shall have it."
Title:  
Title:  "Good God!" cried the hollow voice of Athos, "I can hear
Title:  d'Artagnan, I think."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," cried d'Artagnan, raising his voice in turn, "I am here,
Title:  my friend."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, good, then," replied Athos, "we will teach them, these door
Title:  breakers!"
Title:  
Title:  The gentlemen had drawn their swords, but they found themselves
Title:  taken between two fires.  They still hesitated an instant; but, as
Title:  before, pride prevailed, and a second kick split the door from
Title:  bottom to top.
Title:  
Title:  "Stand on one side, d'Artagnan, stand on one side," cried Athos.
Title:  "I am going to fire!"
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," exclaimed d'Artagnan, whom reflection never
Title:  abandoned, "gentlemen, think of what you are about.  Patience,
Title:  Athos!  You are running your heads into a very silly affair; you
Title:  will be riddled.  My lackey and I will have three shots at you,
Title:  and you will get as many from the cellar.  You will then have our
Title:  swords, with which, I can assure you, my friend and I can play
Title:  tolerably well.  Let me conduct your business and my own.  You
Title:  shall soon have something to drink; I give you my word."
Title:  
Title:  "If there is any left," grumbled the jeering voice of Athos.
Title:  
Title:  The host felt a cold sweat creep down his back.
Title:  
Title:  "How!  'If there is any left!'" murmured he.
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil!  There must be plenty left," replied d'Artagnan.
Title:  "Be satisfied of that; these two cannot have drunk all the
Title:  cellar.  Gentlemen, return your swords to their scabbards."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, provided you replace your pistols in your belt."
Title:  
Title:  "Willingly."
Title:  
Title:  And d'Artagnan set the example.  Then, turning toward Planchet,
Title:  he made him a sign to uncock his musketoon.
Title:  
Title:  The Englishmen, convinced of these peaceful proceedings, sheathed
Title:  their swords grumblingly.  The history of Athos's imprisonment
Title:  was then related to them; and as they were really gentlemen, they
Title:  pronounced the host in the wrong.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "go up to your room again; and
Title:  in ten minutes, I will answer for it, you shall have all you
Title:  desire."
Title:  
Title:  The Englishmen bowed and went upstairs.
Title:  
Title:  "Now I am alone, my dear Athos," said d'Artagnan; "open the door,
Title:  I beg of you."
Title:  
Title:  "Instantly," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Then was heard a great noise of fagots being removed and of the
Title:  groaning of posts; these were the counterscarps and bastions of
Title:  Athos, which the besieged himself demolished.
Title:  
Title:  An instant after, the broken door was removed, and the pale face
Title:  of Athos appeared, who with a rapid glance took a survey of the
Title:  surroundings.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan threw himself on his neck and embraced him tenderly.
Title:  He then tried to draw him from his moist abode, but to his
Title:  surprise he perceived that Athos staggered.
Title:  
Title:  "You are wounded," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "I!  Not at all.  I am dead drunk, that's all, and never did a
Title:  man more strongly set about getting so.  By the Lord, my good
Title:  host!  I must at least have drunk for my part a hundred and fifty
Title:  bottles."
Title:  
Title:  "Mercy!" cried the host, "if the lackey has drunk only half as
Title:  much as the master, I am a ruined man."
Title:  
Title:  "Grimaud is a well-bred lackey.  He would never think of faring
Title:  in the same manner as his master; he only drank from the cask.
Title:  Hark!  I don't think he put the faucet in again.  Do you hear it?
Title:  It is running now."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan burst into a laugh which changed the shiver of the
Title:  host into a burning fever.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, Grimaud appeared in his turn behind his master,
Title:  with the musketoon on his shoulder, and his head shaking. Like
Title:  one of those drunken satyrs in the pictures of Rubens.  He was
Title:  moistened before and behind with a greasy liquid which the host
Title:  recognized as his best olive oil.
Title:  
Title:  The four crossed the public room and proceeded to take possession
Title:  of the best apartment in the house, which d'Artagnan occupied
Title:  with authority.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime the host and his wife hurried down with lamps
Title:  into the cellar, which had so long been interdicted to them and
Title:  where a frightful spectacle awaited them.
Title:  
Title:  Beyond the fortifications through which Athos had made a breach
Title:  in order to get out, and which were composed of fagots, planks,
Title:  and empty casks, heaped up according to all the rules of the
Title:  strategic art, they found, swimming in puddles of oil and wine,
Title:  the bones and fragments of all the hams they had eaten; while a
Title:  heap of broken bottles filled the whole left-hand corner of the
Title:  cellar, and a tun, the cock of which was left running, was
Title:  yielding, by this means, the last drop of its blood.  "The image
Title:  of devastation and death," as the ancient poet says, "reigned as
Title:  over a field of battle."
Title:  
Title:  Of fifty large sausages, suspended from the joists, scarcely ten
Title:  remained.
Title:  
Title:  Then the lamentations of the host and hostess pierced the vault
Title:  of the cellar.  D'Artagnan himself was moved by them.  Athos did
Title:  not even turn his head.
Title:  
Title:  To grief succeeded rage.  The host armed himself with a spit, and
Title:  rushed into the chamber occupied by the two friends.
Title:  
Title:  "Some wine!" said Athos, on perceiving the host.
Title:  
Title:  "Some wine!" cried the stupefied host, "some wine?  Why you have
Title:  drunk more than a hundred pistoles' worth!  I am a ruined man,
Title:  lost, destroyed!"
Title:  
Title:  "Bah," said Athos, "we were always dry."
Title:  
Title:  "If you had been contented with drinking, well and good; but you
Title:  have broken all the bottles."
Title:  
Title:  "You pushed me upon a heap which rolled down.  That was your
Title:  fault."
Title:  
Title:  "All my oil is lost!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oil is a sovereign balm for wounds; and my poor Grimaud here was
Title:  obliged to dress those you had inflicted on him."
Title:  
Title:  "All my sausages are gnawed!"
Title:  
Title:  "There is an enormous quantity of rats in that cellar."
Title:  
Title:  "You shall pay me for all this," cried the exasperated host.
Title:  
Title:  "Triple ass!" said Athos, rising; but he sank down again
Title:  immediately.  He had tried his strength to the utmost.
Title:  d'Artagnan came to his relief with his whip in his hand.
Title:  
Title:  The host drew back and burst into tears.
Title:  
Title:  "This will teach you," said d'Artagnan, "to treat the guests God
Title:  sends you in a more courteous fashion."
Title:  
Title:  "God?  Say the devil!"
Title:  
Title:  "My dear friend," said d'Artagnan, "if you annoy us in this
Title:  manner we will all four go and shut ourselves up in your cellar,
Title:  and we will see if the mischief is as great as you say."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, gentlemen," said the host, "I have been wrong.  I confess
Title:  it, but pardon to every sin!  You are gentlemen, and I am a poor
Title:  innkeeper.  You will have pity on me."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, if you speak in that way," said Athos, "you will break my
Title:  heart, and the tears will flow from my eyes as the wine flowed
Title:  from the cask.  We are not such devils as we appear to be.  Come
Title:  hither, and let us talk."
Title:  
Title:  The host approached with hesitation.
Title:  
Title:  "Come hither, I say, and don't be afraid," continued Athos.  "At
Title:  the very moment when I was about to pay you, I had placed my
Title:  purse on the table."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "That purse contained sixty pistoles; where is it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Deposited with the justice; they said it was bad money."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well; get me my purse back and keep the sixty pistoles."
Title:  
Title:  "But Monseigneur knows very well that justice never lets go that
Title:  which it once lays hold of.  If it were bad money, there might be
Title:  some hopes; but unfortunately, those were all good pieces."
Title:  
Title:  "Manage the matter as well as you can, my good man; it does not
Title:  concern me, the more so as I have not a livre left."
Title:  
Title:  "Come," said d'Artagnan, "let us inquire further.  Athos's horse,
Title:  where is that?"
Title:  
Title:  "In the stable."
Title:  
Title:  "How much is it worth?"
Title:  
Title:  "Fifty pistoles at most."
Title:  
Title:  "It's worth eighty.  Take it, and there ends the matter."
Title:  
Title:  "What," cried Athos, "are you selling my horse--my Bajazet?  And
Title:  pray upon what shall I make my campaign; upon Grimaud?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have brought you another," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Another?"
Title:  
Title:  "And a magnificent one!" cried the host.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, since there is another finer and younger, why, you may
Title:  take the old one; and let us drink."
Title:  
Title:  "What?" asked the host, quite cheerful again.
Title:  
Title:  "Some of that at the bottom, near the laths.  There are twenty-
Title:  five bottles of it left; all the rest were broken by my fall.
Title:  Bring six of them."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, this man is a cask!" said the host, aside.  "If he only
Title:  remains here a fortnight, and pays for what he drinks, I shall
Title:  soon re-establish my business."
Title:  
Title:  "And don't forget," said d'Artagnan, "to bring up four bottles of
Title:  the same sort for the two English gentlemen."
Title:  
Title:  "And now," said Athos, "while they bring the wine, tell me,
Title:  d'Artagnan, what has become of the others, come!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan related how he had found Porthos in bed with a
Title:  strained knee, and Aramis at a table between two theologians.  As
Title:  he finished, the host entered with the wine ordered and a ham
Title:  which, fortunately for him, had been left out of the cellar.
Title:  
Title:  "That's well!" said Athos, filling his glass and that of his
Title:  friend; "here's to Porthos and Aramis!  But you, d'Artagnan, what
Title:  is the matter with you, and what has happened to you personally?
Title:  You have a sad air."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas," said d'Artagnan, "it is because I am the most
Title:  unfortunate."
Title:  
Title:  "Tell me."
Title:  
Title:  "Presently," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Presently!  And why presently?  Because you think I am drunk?
Title:  d'Artagnan, remember this!  My ideas are never so clear as when I
Title:  have had plenty of wine.  Speak, then, I am all ears."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan related his adventure with Mme. Bonacieux.  Athos
Title:  listened to him without a frown; and when he had finished, said,
Title:  "Trifles, only trifles!"  That was his favorite word.
Title:  
Title:  "You always say TRIFLES, my dear Athos!" said d'Artagnan, "and
Title:  that come very ill from you, who have never loved."
Title:  
Title:  The drink-deadened eye of Athos flashed out, but only for a
Title:  moment; it became as dull and vacant as before.
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said he, quietly, "for my part I have never
Title:  loved."
Title:  
Title:  "Acknowledge, then, you stony heart," said d'Artagnan, "that you
Title:  are wrong to be so hard upon us tender hearts."
Title:  
Title:  "Tender hearts!   Pierced hearts!" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "I say that love is a lottery in which he who wins, wins death!
Title:  You are very fortunate to have lost, believe me, my dear
Title:  d'Artagnan.  And if I have any counsel to give, it is, always
Title:  lose!"
Title:  
Title:  "She seemed to love me so!"
Title:  
Title:  "She SEEMED, did she?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, she DID love me!"
Title:  
Title:  "You child, why, there is not a man who has not believed, as you
Title:  do, that his mistress loved him, and there lives not a man who
Title:  has not been deceived by his mistress."
Title:  
Title:  "Except you, Athos, who never had one."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said Athos, after a moment's silence, "that's
Title:  true!  I never had one!  Let us drink!"
Title:  
Title:  "But then, philosopher that you are," said d'Artagnan, "instruct
Title:  me, support me.  I stand in need of being taught and consoled."
Title:  
Title:  "Consoled for what?"
Title:  
Title:  "For my misfortune."
Title:  
Title:  "Your misfortune is laughable," said Athos, shrugging his
Title:  shoulders; "I should like to know what you would say if I were to
Title:  relate to you a real tale of love!"
Title:  
Title:  "Which has happened to you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Or one of my friends, what matters?"
Title:  
Title:  "Tell it, Athos, tell it."
Title:  
Title:  "Better if I drink."
Title:  
Title:  "Drink and relate, then."
Title:  
Title:  "Not a bad idea!" said Athos, emptying and refilling his glass.
Title:  "The two things agree marvelously well."
Title:  
Title:  "I am all attention," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  Athos collected himself, and in proportion as he did so,
Title:  d'Artagnan saw that he became pale.  He was at that period of
Title:  intoxication in which vulgar drinkers fall on the floor and go to
Title:  sleep.  He kept himself upright and dreamed, without sleeping.
Title:  This somnambulism of drunkenness had something frightful in it.
Title:  
Title:  "You particularly wish it?" asked he.
Title:  
Title:  "I pray for it," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Be it then as you desire.  One of my friends--one of my friends,
Title:  please to observe, not myself," said Athos, interrupting himself
Title:  with a melancholy smile, "one of the counts of my province--that
Title:  is to say, of Berry--noble as a Dandolo or a Montmorency, at
Title:  twenty-five years of age fell in love with a girl of sixteen,
Title:  beautiful as fancy can paint.  Through the ingenuousness of her
Title:  age beamed an ardent mind, not of the woman, but of the poet.
Title:  She did not please; she intoxicated.  She lived in a small town
Title:  with her brother, who was a curate.  Both had recently come into
Title:  the country.  They came nobody knew whence; but when seeing her
Title:  so lovely and her brother so pious, nobody thought of asking
Title:  whence they came.  They were said, however, to be of good
Title:  extraction.  My friend, who was seigneur of the country, might
Title:  have seduced her, or taken her by force, at his will--for he was
Title:  master.  Who would have come to the assistance of two strangers,
Title:  two unknown persons?  Unfortunately he was an honorable man; he
Title:  married her.  The fool!  The ass!  The idiot!"
Title:  
Title:  "How so, if he love her?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Wait," said Athos.  "He took her to his chateau, and made her
Title:  the first lady in the province; and in justice it must be allowed
Title:  that she supported her rank becomingly."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, one day when she was hunting with her husband," continued
Title:  Athos, in a low voice, and speaking very quickly, "she fell from
Title:  her horse and fainted.  The count flew to her to help, and as she
Title:  appeared to be oppressed by her clothes, he ripped them open with
Title:  his ponaird, and in so doing laid bare her shoulder.
Title:  d'Artagnan," said Athos, with a maniacal burst of laughter,
Title:  "guess what she had on her shoulder."
Title:  
Title:  "How can I tell?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "A FLEUR-DE-LIS," said Athos.  "She was branded."
Title:  
Title:  Athos emptied at a single draught the glass he held in his hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Horror!" cried d'Artagnan.  "What do you tell me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Truth, my friend.  The angel was a demon; the poor young girl
Title:  had stolen the sacred vessels from a church."
Title:  
Title:  "And what did the count do?"
Title:  
Title:  "The count was of the highest nobility.  He had on his estates
Title:  the rights of high and low tribunals.  He tore the dress of the
Title:  countess to pieces; he tied her hands behind her, and hanged her
Title:  on a tree."
Title:  
Title:  "Heavens, Athos, a murder?" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "No less," said Athos, as pale as a corpse.  "But methinks I need
Title:  wine!" and he seized by the neck the last bottle that was left,
Title:  put it to his mouth, and emptied it at a single draught, as he
Title:  would have emptied an ordinary glass.
Title:  
Title:  Then he let his head sink upon his two hands, while d'Artagnan
Title:  stood before him, stupefied.
Title:  
Title:  "That has cured me of beautiful, poetical, and loving women,"
Title:  said Athos, after a considerable pause, raising his head, and
Title:  forgetting to continue the fiction of the count.  "God grant you
Title:  as much!  Let us drink."
Title:  
Title:  "Then she is dead?" stammered d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "PARBLEU!" said Athos.  "But hold out your glass.  Some ham, my
Title:  boy, or we can't drink."
Title:  
Title:  "And her brother?" added d'Artagnan, timidly.
Title:  
Title:  "Her brother?" replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, the priest."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I inquired after him for the purpose of hanging him
Title:  likewise; but he was beforehand with me, he had quit the curacy
Title:  the night before."
Title:  
Title:  "Was it ever known who this miserable fellow was?"
Title:  
Title:  "He was doubtless the first lover and accomplice of the fair
Title:  lady.  A worthy man, who had pretended to be a curate for the
Title:  purpose of getting his mistress married, and securing her a
Title:  position.  He has been hanged and quartered, I hope."
Title:  
Title:  "My God, my God!" cried d'Artagnan, quite stunned by the relation
Title:  of this horrible adventure.
Title:  
Title:  "Taste some of this ham, d'Artagnan; it is exquisite," said
Title:  Athos, cutting a slice, which he placed on the young man's plate.
Title:  
Title:  "What a pity it is there were only four like this in the cellar.
Title:  I could have drunk fifty bottles more."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan could no longer endure this conversation, which had
Title:  made him bewildered.  Allowing his head to sink upon his two
Title:  hands, he pretended to sleep.
Title:  
Title:  "These young fellows can none of them drink," said Athos, looking
Title:  at him with pity, "and yet this is one of the best!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  28  THE RETURN
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was astounded by the terrible confidence of Athos; yet
Title:  many things appeared very obscure to him in this half revelation.
Title:  In the first place it had been made by a man quite drunk to one
Title:  who was half drunk; and yet, in spite of the incertainty which
Title:  the vapor of three or four bottles of Burgundy carries with it to
Title:  the brain, d'Artagnan, when awaking on the following morning, had
Title:  all the words of Athos as present to his memory as if they then
Title:  fell from his mouth--they had been so impressed upon his mind.
Title:  All this doubt only gave rise to a more lively desire of arriving
Title:  at a certainty, and he went into his friend's chamber with a
Title:  fixed determination of renewing the conversation of the preceding
Title:  evening; but he found Athos quite himself again--that is to say,
Title:  the most shrewd and impenetrable of men.  Besides which, the
Title:  Musketeer, after having exchanged a hearty shake of the hand with
Title:  him, broached the matter first.
Title:  
Title:  "I was pretty drunk yesterday, d'Artagnan," said he, "I can tell
Title:  that by my tongue, which was swollen and hot this morning, and by
Title:  my pulse, which was very tremulous.  I wager that I uttered a
Title:  thousand extravagances."
Title:  
Title:  While saying this he looked at his friend with an earnestness
Title:  that embarrassed him.
Title:  
Title:  "No," replied d'Artagnan, "if I recollect well what you said, it
Title:  was nothing out of the common way."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you surprise me.  I thought I had told you a most lamentable
Title:  story."  And he looked at the young man as if he would read the
Title:  bottom of his heart.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith," said d'Artagnan, "it appears that I was more drunk
Title:  than you, since I remember nothing of the kind."
Title:  
Title:  Athos did not trust this reply, and he resumed; "you cannot have
Title:  failed to remark, my dear friend, that everyone has his
Title:  particular kind of drunkenness, sad or gay.  My drunkenness is
Title:  always sad, and when I am thoroughly drunk my mania is to relate
Title:  all the lugubrious stories which my foolish nurse inculcated into
Title:  my brain.  That is my failing--a capital failing, I admit; but
Title:  with that exception, I am a good drinker."
Title:  
Title:  Athos spoke this in so natural a manner that d'Artagnan was
Title:  shaken in his conviction.
Title:  
Title:  "It is that, then," replied the young man, anxious to find out
Title:  the truth, "it is that, then, I remember as we remember a dream.
Title:  We were speaking of hanging."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you see how it is," said Athos, becoming still paler, but
Title:  yet attempting to laugh; "I was sure it was so--the hanging of
Title:  people is my nightmare."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," replied d'Artagnan.  "I remember now; yes, it was
Title:  about--stop a minute--yes, it was about a woman."
Title:  
Title:  "That's it," replied Athos, becoming almost livid; "that is my
Title:  grand story of the fair lady, and when I relate that, I must be
Title:  very drunk."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that was it," said d'Artagnan, "the story of a tall, fair
Title:  lady, with blue eyes."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, who was hanged."
Title:  
Title:  "By her husband, who was a nobleman of your acquaintance,"
Title:  continued d'Artagnan, looking intently at Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, you see how a man may compromise himself when he does not
Title:  know what he says," replied Athos, shrugging his shoulders as if
Title:  he thought himself an object of pity.  "I certainly never will
Title:  get drunk again, d'Artagnan; it is too bad a habit."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan remained silent; and then changing the conversation
Title:  all at once, Athos said:
Title:  
Title:  "By the by, I thank you for the horse you have brought me."
Title:  
Title:  "Is it to your mind?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but it is not a horse for hard work."
Title:  
Title:  "You are mistaken; I rode him nearly ten leagues in less than an
Title:  hour and a half, and he appeared no more distressed than if he
Title:  had only made the tour of the Place St. Sulpice."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you begin to awaken my regret."
Title:  
Title:  "Regret?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; I have parted with him."
Title:  
Title:  "How?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, here is the simple fact.  This morning I awoke at six
Title:  o'clock.  You were still fast asleep, and I did not know what to
Title:  do with myself; I was still stupid from our yesterday's debauch.
Title:  As I came into the public room, I saw one of our Englishman
Title:  bargaining with a dealer for a horse, his own having died
Title:  yesterday from bleeding.  I drew near, and found he was bidding a
Title:  hundred pistoles for a chestnut nag.  'PARDIEU,' said I, 'my good
Title:  gentleman, I have a horse to sell, too.' 'Ay, and a very fine
Title:  one!  I saw him yesterday; your friend's lackey was leading him.'
Title:  'Do you think he is worth a hundred pistoles?' 'Yes!  Will you
Title:  sell him to me for that sum?' 'No; but I will play for him.'
Title:  'What?' 'At dice.'  No sooner said than done, and I lost the
Title:  horse.  Ah, ah!  But please to observe I won back the equipage,"
Title:  cried Athos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan looked much disconcerted.
Title:  
Title:  "This vexes you?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I must confess it does," replied d'Artagnan.  "That horse
Title:  was to have identified us in the day of battle.  It was a pledge,
Title:  a remembrance.  Athos, you have done wrong."
Title:  
Title:  "But, my dear friend, put yourself in my place," replied the
Title:  Musketeer.  "I was hipped to death; and still further, upon my
Title:  honor, I don't like English horses.  If it is only to be
Title:  recognized, why the saddle will suffice for that; it is quite
Title:  remarkable enough.  As to the horse, we can easily find some
Title:  excuse for its disappearance.  Why the devil!  A horse is mortal;
Title:  suppose mine had had the glanders or the farcy?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan did not smile.
Title:  
Title:  "It vexes me greatly," continued Athos, "that you attach so much
Title:  importance to these animals, for I am not yet at the end of my
Title:  story."
Title:  
Title:  "What else have you done."
Title:  
Title:  "After having lost my own horse, nine against ten--see how near--
Title:  I formed an idea of staking yours."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but you stopped at the idea, I hope?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; for I put it in execution that very minute."
Title:  
Title:  "And the consequence?" said d'Artagnan, in great anxiety.
Title:  
Title:  "I threw, and I lost."
Title:  
Title:  "What, my horse?"
Title:  
Title:  "Your horse, seven against eight; a point short--you know the
Title:  proverb."
Title:  
Title:  "Athos, you are not in your right senses, I swear."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear lad, that was yesterday, when I was telling you silly
Title:  stories, it was proper to tell me that, and not this morning.  I
Title:  lost him then, with all his appointments and furniture."
Title:  
Title:  "Really, this is frightful."
Title:  
Title:  "Stop a minute; you don't know all yet.  I should make an
Title:  excellent gambler if I were not too hot-headed; but I was hot-
Title:  headed, just as if I had been drinking.  Well, I was not hot-
Title:  headed then--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but what else could you play for?  You had nothing left?"
Title:  
Title:  'Oh, yes, my friend; there was still that diamond left which
Title:  sparkles on your finger, and which I had observed yesterday."
Title:  
Title:  "This diamond!" said d'Artagnan, placing his hand eagerly on his
Title:  ring.
Title:  
Title:  "And as I am a connoisseur in such things, having had a few of my
Title:  own once, I estimated it at a thousand pistoles."
Title:  
Title:  "I hope," said d'Artagnan, half dead with fright, "you made no
Title:  mention of my diamond?"
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary, my dear friend, this diamond became our only
Title:  resource; with it I might regain our horses and their harnesses,
Title:  and even money to pay our expenses on the road."
Title:  
Title:  "Athos, you make me tremble!" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I mentioned your diamond then to my adversary, who had likewise
Title:  remarked it.  What the devil, my dear, do you think you can wear
Title:  a star from heaven on your finger, and nobody observe it?
Title:  Impossible!"
Title:  
Title:  "Go on, go on, my dear fellow!" said d'Artagnan; "for upon my
Title:  honor, you will kill me with your indifference."
Title:  
Title:  "We divided, then, this diamond into ten parts of a hundred
Title:  pistoles each."
Title:  
Title:  "You are laughing at me, and want to try me!" said d'Artagnan,
Title:  whom anger began to take by the hair, as Minerva takes Achilles,
Title:  in the ILLIAD.
Title:  
Title:  "No, I do not jest, MORDIEU!  I should like to have seen you in
Title:  my place!  I had been fifteen days without seeing a human face,
Title:  and had been left to brutalize myself in the company of bottles."
Title:  
Title:  "That was no reason for staking my diamond!" replied d'Artagnan,
Title:  closing his hand with a nervous spasm.
Title:  
Title:  "Hear the end.  Ten parts of a hundred pistoles each, in ten
Title:  throws, without revenge; in thirteen throws I had lost all--in
Title:  thirteen throws.  The number thirteen was always fatal to me; it
Title:  was on the thirteenth of July that--"
Title:  
Title:  "VENTREBLEU!" cried d'Artagnan, rising from the table, the story
Title:  of the present day making him forget that of the preceding one.
Title:  
Title:  "Patience!" said Athos; "I had a plan.  The Englishman was an
Title:  original; I had seen him conversing that morning with Grimaud,
Title:  and Grimaud had told me that he had made him proposals to enter
Title:  into his service.  I staked Grimaud, the silent Grimaud, divided
Title:  into ten portions."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what next?" said d'Artagnan, laughing in spite of himself.
Title:  
Title:  "Grimaud himself, understand; and with the ten parts of Grimaud,
Title:  which are not worth a ducatoon, I regained the diamond.  Tell me,
Title:  now, if persistence is not a virtue?"
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!  But this is droll," cried d'Artagnan, consoled, and
Title:  holding his sides with laughter.
Title:  
Title:  "You may guess, finding the luck turned, that I again staked the
Title:  diamond."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" said d'Artagnan, becoming angry again.
Title:  
Title:  "I won back your harness, then your horse, then my harness, then
Title:  my horse, and then I lost again.  In brief, I regained your
Title:  harness and then mine.  That's where we are.  That was a superb
Title:  throw, so I left off there."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan breathed as if the whole hostelry had been removed
Title:  from his breast.
Title:  
Title:  "Then the diamond is safe?" said he, timidly.
Title:  
Title:  "Intact, my dear friend; besides the harness of your Bucephalus
Title:  and mine."
Title:  
Title:  "But what is the use of harnesses without horses?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have an idea about them."
Title:  
Title:  "Athos, you make me shudder."
Title:  
Title:  "Listen to me.  You have not played for a long time, d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "And I have no inclination to play."
Title:  
Title:  "Swear to nothing.  You have not played for a long time, I said;
Title:  you ought, then, to have a good hand."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well; the Englishman and his companion are still here.  I
Title:  remarked that he regretted the horse furniture very much.  You
Title:  appear to think much of your horse.  In your place I would stake
Title:  the furniture against the horse."
Title:  
Title:  "But he will not wish for only one harness."
Title:  
Title:  "Stake both, PARDIEU!  I am not selfish, as you are."
Title:  
Title:  "You would do so?" said d'Artagnan, undecided, so strongly did
Title:  the confidence of Athos begin to prevail, in spite of himself.
Title:  
Title:  "On my honor, in one single throw."
Title:  
Title:  "But having lost the horses, I am particularly anxious to
Title:  preserve the harnesses."
Title:  
Title:  "Stake your diamond, then."
Title:  
Title:  "This?  That's another matter.  Never, never!"
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" said Athos.  "I would propose to you to stake
Title:  Planchet, but as that has already been done, the Englishman would
Title:  not, perhaps, be willing."
Title:  
Title:  "Decidedly, my dear Athos," said d'Artagnan, "I should like
Title:  better not to risk anything."
Title:  
Title:  "That's a pity," said Athos, coolly.  "The Englishman is
Title:  overflowing with pistoles.  Good Lord, try one throw!  One throw
Title:  is soon made!"
Title:  
Title:  "And if I lose?"
Title:  
Title:  "You will win."
Title:  
Title:  "But if I lose?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, you will surrender the harnesses."
Title:  
Title:  "Have with you for one throw!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  Athos went in quest of the Englishman, whom he found in the
Title:  stable, examining the harnesses with a greedy eye.  The
Title:  opportunity was good.  He proposed the conditions--the two
Title:  harnesses, either against one horse or a hundred pistoles.  The
Title:  Englishman calculated fast; the two harnesses were worth three
Title:  hundred pistoles.  He consented.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan threw the dice with a trembling hand, and turned up
Title:  the number three; his paleness terrified Athos, who, however,
Title:  consented himself with saying, "That's a sad throw, comrade; you
Title:  will have the horses fully equipped, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  The Englishman, quite triumphant, did not even give himself the
Title:  trouble to shake the dice.  He threw them on the table without
Title:  looking at them, so sure was he of victory; d'Artagnan turned
Title:  aside to conceal his ill humor.
Title:  
Title:  "Hold, hold, hold!" said Athos, wit his quiet tone; "that throw
Title:  of the dice is extraordinary.  I have not seen such a one four
Title:  times in my life.  Two aces!"
Title:  
Title:  The Englishman looked, and was seized with astonishment.
Title:  d'Artagnan looked, and was seized with pleasure.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," continued Athos, "four times only; once at the house of
Title:  Monsieur Crequy; another time at my own house in the country, in
Title:  my chateau at--when I had a chateau; a third time at Monsieur de
Title:  Treville's where it surprised us all; and the fourth time at a
Title:  cabaret, where it fell to my lot, and where I lost a hundred
Title:  louis and a supper on it."
Title:  
Title:  "Then Monsieur takes his horse back again," said the Englishman.
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Then there is no revenge?"
Title:  
Title:  "Our conditions said, 'No revenge,' you will please to
Title:  recollect."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true; the horse shall be restored to your lackey,
Title:  monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "A moment," said Athos; "with your permission, monsieur, I wish
Title:  to speak a word with my friend."
Title:  
Title:  "Say on."
Title:  
Title:  Athos drew d'Artagnan aside.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, Tempter, what more do you want with me?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  "You want me to throw again, do you not?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, I would wish you to reflect."
Title:  
Title:  "On what?"
Title:  
Title:  "You mean to take your horse?"
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt."
Title:  
Title:  "You are wrong, then.  I would take the hundred pistoles.  You
Title:  know you have staked the harnesses against the horse or a hundred
Title:  pistoles, at your choice."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, I repeat, you are wrong.  What is the use of one
Title:  horse for us two?  I could not ride behind.  We should look like
Title:  the two sons of Anmon, who had lost their brother.  You cannot
Title:  think of humiliating me by prancing along by my side on that
Title:  magnificent charger.  For my part, I should not hesitate a
Title:  moment; I should take the hundred pistoles.  We want money for
Title:  our return to Paris."
Title:  
Title:  "I am much attached to that horse, Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "And there again you are wrong.  A horse slips and injures a
Title:  joint; a horse stumbles and breaks his knees to the bone; a horse
Title:  eats out of a manger in which a glandered horse has eaten.  There
Title:  is a horse, while on the contrary, the hundred pistoles feed
Title:  their master."
Title:  
Title:  "But how shall we get back?"
Title:  
Title:  "Upon our lackey's horses, PARDIEU.  Anybody may see by our
Title:  bearing that we are people of condition."
Title:  
Title:  "Pretty figures we shall cut on ponies while Aramis and Porthos
Title:  caracole on their steeds."
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis!  Porthos!" cried Athos, and laughed aloud.
Title:  
Title:  "What is it?" asked d'Artagnan, who did not at all comprehend the
Title:  hilarity of his friend.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing, nothing!  Go on!"
Title:  
Title:  "Your advice, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "To take the hundred pistoles, d'Artagnan.  With the hundred
Title:  pistoles we can live well to the end of the month.  We have
Title:  undergone a great deal of fatigue, remember, and a little rest
Title:  will do no harm."
Title:  
Title:  "I rest?  Oh, no, Athos.  Once in Paris, I shall prosecute my
Title:  search for that unfortunate woman!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, you may be assured that your horse will not be half so
Title:  serviceable to you for that purpose as good golden louis.  Take
Title:  the hundred pistoles, my friend; take the hundred pistoles!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied.  This last
Title:  reason appeared convincing.  Besides, he feared that by resisting
Title:  longer he should appear selfish in the eyes of Athos.  He
Title:  acquiesced, therefore, and chose the hundred pistoles, which the
Title:  Englishman paid down on the spot.
Title:  
Title:  They then determined to depart.  Peace with the landlord, in
Title:  addition to Athos's old horse, cost six pistoles.  D'Artagnan and
Title:  Athos took the nags of Planchet and Grimaud, and the two lackeys
Title:  started on foot, carrying the saddles on their heads.
Title:  
Title:  However ill our two friends were mounted, they were soon far in
Title:  advance of their servants, and arrived at Creveccoeur.  From a
Title:  distance they perceived Aramis, seated in a melancholy manner at
Title:  his window, looking out, like Sister Anne, at the dust in the
Title:  horizon.
Title:  
Title:  "HOLA, Aramis!  What the devil are you doing there?" cried the
Title:  two friends.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, is that you, d'Artagnan, and you, Athos?" said the young
Title:  man.  "I was reflecting upon the rapidity with which the
Title:  blessings of this world leave us.  My English horse, which has
Title:  just disappeared amid a cloud of dust, has furnished me with a
Title:  living image of the fragility of the things of the earth.  Life
Title:  itself may be resolved into three words:  ERAT, EST, FUIT."
Title:  
Title:  "Which means--" said d'Artagnan, who began to suspect the truth.
Title:  
Title:  "Which means that I have just been duped-sixty louis for a horse
Title:  which by the manner of his gait can do at least five leagues an
Title:  hour."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan and Athos laughed aloud.
Title:  
Title:  "My dear d'Artagnan," said Aramis, "don't be too angry with me, I
Title:  beg.  Necessity has no law; besides, I am the person punished, as
Title:  that rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis, at least.
Title:  Ah, you fellows are good managers!  You ride on our lackey's
Title:  horses, and have your own gallant steeds led along carefully by
Title:  hand, at short stages."
Title:  
Title:  At the same instant a market cart, which some minutes before had
Title:  appeared upon the Amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and Planchet
Title:  and Grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads.  The
Title:  cart was returning empty to Paris, and the two lackeys had
Title:  agreed, for their transport, to slake the wagoner's thirst along
Title:  the route.
Title:  
Title:  "What is this?" said Aramis, on seeing them arrive.  "Nothing but
Title:  saddles?"
Title:  
Title:  "Now do you understand?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "My friends, that's exactly like me!  I retained my harness by
Title:  instinct.  HOLA, Bazin! Bring my new saddle and carry it along
Title:  with those of these gentlemen."
Title:  
Title:  "And what have you done with your ecclesiastics?" asked
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "My dear fellow, I invited them to a dinner the next day,"
Title:  replied Aramis.  "They have some capital wine here--please to
Title:  observe that in passing.  I did my best to make them drunk.  Then
Title:  the curate forbade me to quit my uniform, and the Jesuit
Title:  entreated me to get him made a Musketeer."
Title:  
Title:  "Without a thesis?" cried d'Artagnan, "without a thesis?  I
Title:  demand the suppression of the thesis."
Title:  
Title:  "Since then," continued Aramis, "I have lived very agreeably.  I
Title:  have begun a poem in verses of one syllable.  That is rather
Title:  difficult, but the merit in all things consists in the
Title:  difficulty.  The matter is gallant.  I will read you the first
Title:  canto.  It has four hundred lines, and lasts a minute."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, my dear Aramis," said d'Artagnan, who detested verses
Title:  almost as much as he did Latin, "add to the merit of the
Title:  difficulty that of the brevity, and you are sure that your poem
Title:  will at least have two merits."
Title:  
Title:  "You will see," continued Aramis, "that it breathes
Title:  irreproachable passion.  And so, my friends, we return to Paris?
Title:  Bravo!  I am ready.  We are going to rejoin that good fellow,
Title:  Porthos.  So much the better.  You can't think how I have missed
Title:  him, the great simpleton.  To see him so self-satisfied
Title:  reconciles me with myself.  He would not sell his horse; not for
Title:  a kingdom!  I think I can see him now, mounted upon his superb
Title:  animal and seated in his handsome saddle.  I am sure he will look
Title:  like the Great Mogul!"
Title:  
Title:  They made a halt for an hour to refresh their horses.  Aramis
Title:  discharged his bill, placed Bazin in the cart with his comrades,
Title:  and they set forward to join Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  They found him up, less pale than when d'Artagnan left him after
Title:  his first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he was
Title:  alone, was spread enough for four persons.  This dinner consisted
Title:  of meats nicely dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, PARDIEU!" said he, rising, "you come in the nick of time,
Title:  gentlemen.  I was just beginning the soup, and you will dine with
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, oh!" said d'Artagnan, "Mousqueton has not caught these
Title:  bottles with his lasso.  Besides, here is a piquant FRICANDEAU
Title:  and a fillet of beef."
Title:  
Title:  "I am recruiting myself," said Porthos, "I am recruiting myself.
Title:  Nothing weakens a man more than these devilish strains.  Did you
Title:  ever suffer from a strain, Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "Never!  Though I remember, in our affair of the Rue Ferou, I
Title:  received a sword wound which at the end of fifteen or eighteen
Title:  days produced the same effect."
Title:  
Title:  "But this dinner was not intended for you alone, Porthos?" said
Title:  Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "No," said Porthos, "I expected some gentlemen of the
Title:  neighborhood, who have just sent me word they could not come.
Title:  You will take their places and I shall not lose by the exchange.
Title:  HOLA, Mousqueton, seats, and order double the bottles!"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know what we are eating here?" said Athos, at the end of
Title:  ten minutes.
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU!" replied d'Artagnan, "for my part, I am eating veal
Title:  garnished with shrimps and vegetables."
Title:  
Title:  "And I some lamb chops," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "And I a plain chicken," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "You are all mistaken, gentlemen," answered Athos, gravely; "you
Title:  are eating horse."
Title:  
Title:  "Eating what?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Horse!" said Aramis, with a grimace of disgust.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos alone made no reply.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, horse.  Are we not eating a horse, Porthos?  And perhaps
Title:  his saddle, therewith."
Title:  
Title:  "No, gentlemen, I have kept the harness," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith," said Aramis, "we are all alike.  One would think we
Title:  had tipped the wink."
Title:  
Title:  "What could I do?" said Porthos.  "This horse made my visitors
Title:  ashamed of theirs, and I don't like to humiliate people."
Title:  
Title:  "Then your duchess is still at the waters?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Still," replied Porthos.  "And, my faith, the governor of the
Title:  province--one of the gentlemen I expected today--seemed to have
Title:  such a wish for him, that I gave him to him."
Title:  
Title:  "Gave him?" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "My God, yes, GAVE, that is the word," said Porthos; "for the
Title:  animal was worth at least a hundred and fifty louis, and the
Title:  stingy fellow would only give me eighty."
Title:  
Title:  "Without the saddle?" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, without the saddle."
Title:  
Title:  "You will observe, gentlemen," said Athos, "that Porthos has made
Title:  the best bargain of any of us."
Title:  
Title:  And then commenced a roar of laughter in which they all joined,
Title:  to the astonishment of poor Porthos; but when he was informed of
Title:  the cause of their hilarity, he shared it vociferously according
Title:  to his custom.
Title:  
Title:  "There is one comfort, we are all in cash," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, for my part," said Athos, "I found Aramis's Spanish wine
Title:  so good that I sent on a hamper of sixty bottles of it in the
Title:  wagon with the lackeys.  That has weakened my purse."
Title:  
Title:  "And I," said Aramis, "imagined that I had given almost my last
Title:  sou to the church of Montdidier and the Jesuits of Amiens, with
Title:  whom I had made engagements which I ought to have kept.  I have
Title:  ordered Masses for myself, and for you, gentlemen, which will be
Title:  said, gentlemen, for which I have not the least doubt you will be
Title:  marvelously benefited."
Title:  
Title:  "And I," said Porthos, "do you think my strain cost me nothing?--
Title:  without reckoning Mousqueton's wound, for which I had to have the
Title:  surgeon twice a day, and who charged me double on account of that
Title:  foolish Mousqueton having allowed himself a ball in a part which
Title:  people generally only show to an apothecary; so I advised him to
Title:  try never to get wounded there any more."
Title:  
Title:  "Ay, ay!" said Athos, exchanging a smile with d'Artagnan and
Title:  Aramis, "it is very clear you acted nobly with regard to the poor
Title:  lad; that is like a good master."
Title:  
Title:  "In short," said Porthos, "when all my expenses are paid, I shall
Title:  have, at most, thirty crowns left."
Title:  
Title:  "And I about ten pistoles," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then it appears that we are the Croesuses of the society.
Title:  How much have you left of your hundred pistoles, d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "Of my hundred pistoles?  Why, in the first place I gave you
Title:  fifty."
Title:  
Title:  "You think so?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, that is true.  I recollect."
Title:  
Title:  "Then I paid the host six."
Title:  
Title:  "What a brute of a host!  Why did you give him six pistoles?"
Title:  
Title:  "You told me to give them to him."
Title:  
Title:  "It is true; I am too good-natured.  In brief, how much remains?"
Title:  
Title:  "Twenty-five pistoles," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "And I," said Athos, taking some small change from his pocket,
Title:  I--"
Title:  
Title:  "You?  Nothing!"
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!  So little that it is not worth reckoning with the
Title:  general stock."
Title:  
Title:  "Now, then, let us calculate how much we posses in all."
Title:  
Title:  "Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "Thirty crowns."
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ten pistoles."
Title:  
Title:  "And you, d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "Twenty-five."
Title:  
Title:  "That makes in all?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Four hundred and seventy-five livres," said d'Artagnan, who
Title:  reckoned like Archimedes.
Title:  
Title:  "On our arrival in Paris, we shall still have four hundred,
Title:  besides the harnesses," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "But our troop horses?" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, of the four horses of our lackeys we will make two for the
Title:  masters, for which we will draw lots.  With the four hundred
Title:  livres we will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and
Title:  then we will give the turnings out of our pockets to d'Artagnan,
Title:  who has a steady hand, and will go and play in the first gaming
Title:  house we come to.  There!"
Title:  
Title:  "Let us dine, then," said Porthos; "it is getting cold."
Title:  
Title:  The friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the
Title:  repast, the remains of which were abandoned to Mousqueton, Bazin,
Title:  Planchet, and Grimaud.
Title:  
Title:  On arriving in Paris, d'Artagnan found a letter from M. de
Title:  Treville, which informed him that, at his request, the king had
Title:  promised that he should enter the company of the Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  As this was the height of d'Artagnan's worldly ambition--apart,
Title:  be it well understood, from his desire of finding Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux--he ran, full of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had
Title:  left only half an hour before, but whom he found very sad and
Title:  deeply preoccupied.  They were assembled in council at the
Title:  residence of Athos, which always indicated an event of some
Title:  gravity.  M. de Treville had intimated to them his Majesty's
Title:  fixed intention to open the campaign on the first of May, and
Title:  they must immediately prepare their outfits.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The four philosophers looked at one another in a state of
Title:  bewilderment.  M. de Treville never jested in matters relating to
Title:  discipline.
Title:  
Title:  "And what do you reckon your outfit will cost?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, we can scarcely say.  We have made our calculations with
Title:  Spartan economy, and we each require fifteen hundred livres."
Title:  
Title:  "Four times fifteen makes sixty--six thousand livres," said
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "It seems to me," said d'Artagnan, "with a thousand livres each--
Title:  I do not speak as a Spartan, but as a procurator--"
Title:  
Title:  This word PROCURATOR roused Porthos.  "Stop," said he, "I have an
Title:  idea."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, that's something, for I have not the shadow of one," said
Title:  Athos coolly; "but as to d'Artagnan, gentlemen, the idea of
Title:  belonging to OURS has driven him out of his senses.  A thousand
Title:  livres!  For my part, I declare I want two thousand."
Title:  
Title:  "Four times two makes eight," then said Aramis; "it is eight
Title:  thousand that we want to complete our outfits, toward which, it
Title:  is true, we have already the saddles."
Title:  
Title:  "Besides," said Athos, waiting till d'Artagnan, who went to thank
Title:  Monsieur de Treville, had shut the door, "besides, there is that
Title:  beautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend.  What
Title:  the devil!  D'Artagnan is too good a comrade to leave his
Title:  brothers in embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king on
Title:  his finger."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  29  HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS
Title:  
Title:  The most preoccupied of the four friends was certainly
Title:  d'Artagnan, although he, in his quality of Guardsman, would be
Title:  much more easily equipped than Messieurs the Musketeers, who were
Title:  all of high rank; but our Gascon cadet was, as may have been
Title:  observed, of a provident and almost avaricious character, and
Title:  with that (explain the contradiction) so vain as almost to rival
Title:  Porthos.  To this preoccupation of his vanity, d'Artagnan at this
Title:  moment joined an uneasiness much less selfish.  Notwithstanding
Title:  all his inquiries respecting Mme. Bonacieux, he could obtain no
Title:  intelligence of her.  M. de Treville had spoken of her to the
Title:  queen.  The queen was ignorant where the mercer's young wife was,
Title:  but had promised to have her sought for; but this promise was
Title:  very vague and did not at all reassure d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  Athos did not leave his chamber; he made up his mind not to take
Title:  a single step to equip himself.
Title:  
Title:  "We have still fifteen days before us," said he to his friends.
Title:  "well, if at the end of a fortnight I have found nothing, or
Title:  rather if nothing has come to find me, as I, too good a
Title:  Catholic to kill myself with a pistol bullet, I will seek a good
Title:  quarrel with four of his Eminence's Guards or with eight
Title:  Englishmen, and I will fight until one of them has killed me,
Title:  which, considering the number, cannot fail to happen.  It will
Title:  then be said of me that I died for the king; so that I shall have
Title:  performed my duty without the expense of an outfit."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him,
Title:  tossing his head and repeating, "I shall follow up on my idea."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.
Title:  
Title:  It may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation
Title:  reigned in the community.
Title:  
Title:  The lackeys on their part, like the coursers of Hippolytus,
Title:  shared the sadness of their masters.  Mousqueton collected a
Title:  store of crusts; Bazin, who had always been inclined to devotion,
Title:  never quit the churches; Planchet watched the flight of flies;
Title:  and Grimaud, whom the general distress could not induce to break
Title:  the silence imposed by his master, heaved sighs enough to soften
Title:  the stones.
Title:  
Title:  The three friends--for, as we have said, Athos had sworn not to
Title:  stir a foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, and
Title:  returned late at night.  They wandered about the streets, looking
Title:  at the pavement as if to see whether the passengers had not left a
Title:  purse behind them.  They might have been supposed to be following
Title:  tracks, so observant were they wherever they went.  When they met
Title:  they looked desolately at one another, as much as to say, "Have
Title:  you found anything?"
Title:  
Title:  However, as Porthos had first found an idea, and had thought of
Title:  it earnestly afterward, he was the first to act.  He was a man of
Title:  execution, this worthy Porthos.  D'Artagnan perceived him one day
Title:  walking toward the church of St. Leu, and followed him
Title:  instinctively.  He entered, after having twisted his mustache and
Title:  elongated his imperial, which always announced on his part the
Title:  most triumphant resolutions.  As d'Artagnan took some precautions
Title:  to conceal himself, Porthos believed he had not been seen.
Title:  d'Artagnan entered behind him.  Porthos went and leaned against
Title:  the side of a pillar.  D'Artagnan, still unperceived, supported
Title:  himself against the other side.
Title:  
Title:  There happened to be a sermon, which made the church very full of
Title:  people.  Porthos took advantage of this circumstance to ogle the
Title:  women.  Thanks to the cares of Mousqueton, the exterior was far
Title:  from announcing the distress of the interior.  His hat was a
Title:  little napless, his feather was a little faded, his gold lace was
Title:  a little tarnished, his laces were a trifle frayed; but in the
Title:  obscurity of the church these things were not seen, and Porthos
Title:  was still the handsome Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan observed, on the bench nearest to the pillar against
Title:  which Porthos leaned, a sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow and
Title:  rather dry, but erect and haughty under her black hood.  The eyes
Title:  of Porthos were furtively cast upon this lady, and then roved
Title:  about at large over the nave.
Title:  
Title:  On her side the lady, who from time to time blushed, darted with
Title:  the rapidity of lightning a glance toward the inconstant Porthos;
Title:  and then immediately the eyes of Porthos wandered anxiously.  It
Title:  was plain that this mode of proceeding piqued the lady in the
Title:  black hood, for she bit her lips till they bled, scratched the
Title:  end of her nose, and could not sit still in her seat.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos, seeing this, retwisted his mustache, elongated his
Title:  imperial a second time, and began to make signals to a beautiful
Title:  lady who was near the choir, and who not only was a beautiful
Title:  lady, but still further, no doubt, a great lady--for she had
Title:  behind her a Negro boy who had brought the cushion on which she
Title:  knelt, and a female servant who held the emblazoned bag in which
Title:  was placed the book from which she read the Mass.
Title:  
Title:  The lady with the black hood followed through all their
Title:  wanderings the looks of Porthos, and perceived that they rested
Title:  upon the lady with the velvet cushion, the little Negro, and the
Title:  maid-servant.
Title:  
Title:  During this time Porthos played close.  It was almost
Title:  imperceptible motions of his eyes, fingers placed upon the lips,
Title:  little assassinating smiles, which really did assassinate the
Title:  disdained beauty.
Title:  
Title:  Then she cried, "Ahem!" under cover of the MEA CULPA, striking
Title:  her breast so vigorously that everybody, even the lady with the
Title:  red cushion, turned round toward her.  Porthos paid no attention.
Title:  Nevertheless, he understood it all, but was deaf.
Title:  
Title:  The lady with the red cushion produced a great effect--for she
Title:  was very handsome--upon the lady with he black hood, who saw in
Title:  her a rival really to be dreaded; a great effect upon Porthos,
Title:  who thought her much prettier than the lady with the black hood;
Title:  a great effect upon d'Artagnan, who recognized in her the lady of
Title:  Meung, of Calais, and of Dover, whom his persecutor, the man with
Title:  the scar, had saluted by the name of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, without losing sight of the lady of the red cushion,
Title:  continued to watch the proceedings of Porthos, which amused him
Title:  greatly.  He guessed that the lady of the black hood was the
Title:  procurator's wife of the Rue aux Ours, which was the more
Title:  probable from the church of St. Leu being not far from that
Title:  locality.
Title:  
Title:  He guessed, likewise, by induction, that Porthos was taking his
Title:  revenge for the defeat of Chantilly, when the procurator's wife
Title:  had proved so refractory with respect to her purse.
Title:  
Title:  Amid all this, d'Artagnan remarked also that not one countenance
Title:  responded to the gallantries of Porthos.  There were only
Title:  chimeras and illusions; but for real love, for true jealousy, is
Title:  there any reality except illusions and chimeras?
Title:  
Title:  The sermon over, the procurator's wife advanced toward the holy
Title:  font.  Porthos went before her, and instead of a finger, dipped
Title:  his whole hand in.  The procurator's wife smiled, thinking that
Title:  it was for her Porthos had put himself to this trouble; but she
Title:  was cruelly and promptly undeceived.  When she was only about
Title:  three steps from him, he turned his head round, fixing his eyes
Title:  steadfastly upon the lady with the red cushion, who had risen and
Title:  was approaching, followed by her black boy and her woman.
Title:  
Title:  When the lady of the red cushion came close to Porthos, Porthos
Title:  drew his dripping hand from the font.  The fair worshipper
Title:  touched the great hand of Porthos with her delicate fingers,
Title:  smiled, made the sign of the cross, and left the church.
Title:  
Title:  This was too much for the procurator's wife; she doubted not
Title:  there was an intrigue between this lady and Porthos.  If she had
Title:  been a great lady she would have fainted; but as she was only a
Title:  procurator's wife, she contented herself saying to the Musketeer
Title:  with concentrated fury, "Eh, Monsieur Porthos, you don't offer me
Title:  any holy water?"
Title:  
Title:  Porthos, at the sound of that voice, started like a man awakened
Title:  from a sleep of a hundred years.
Title:  
Title:  "Ma-madame!" cried he; "is that you?  How is your husband, our
Title:  dear Monsieur Coquenard?  Is he still as stingy as ever?  Where
Title:  can my eyes have been not to have seen you during the two hours
Title:  of the sermon?"
Title:  
Title:  "I was within two paces of you, monsieur," replied the
Title:  procurator's wife; "but you did not perceive me because you had
Title:  no eyes but for the pretty lady to whom you just now gave the
Title:  holy water."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos pretended to be confused.  "Ah," said he, "you have
Title:  remarked--"
Title:  
Title:  "I must have been blind not to have seen."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Porthos, "that is a duchess of my acquaintance whom I
Title:  have great trouble to meet on account of the jealousy of her
Title:  husband, and who sent me word that she should come today to this
Title:  poor church, buried in this vile quarter, solely for the sake of
Title:  seeing me."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Porthos," said the procurator's wife, "will you have
Title:  the kindness to offer me your arm for five minutes?  I have
Title:  something to say to you."
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly, madame," said Porthos, winking to himself, as a
Title:  gambler does who laughs at the dupe he is about to pluck.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment d'Artagnan passed in pursuit of Milady; he cast a
Title:  passing glance at Porthos, and beheld this triumphant look.
Title:  
Title:  "Eh, eh!" said he, reasoning to himself according to the
Title:  strangely easy morality of that gallant period, "there is one who
Title:  will be equipped in good time!"
Title:  
Title:  Porthos, yielding to the pressure of the arm of the procurator's
Title:  wife, as a bark yields to the rudder, arrived at the cloister St.
Title:  Magloire--a little-frequented passage, enclosed with a turnstile
Title:  at each end.  In the daytime nobody was seen there but mendicants
Title:  devouring their crusts, and children at play.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, Monsieur Porthos," cried the procurator's wife, when she was
Title:  assured that no one who was a stranger to the population of the
Title:  locality could either see or hear her, "ah, Monsieur Porthos, you
Title:  are a great conqueror, as it appears!"
Title:  
Title:  "I, madame?" said Porthos, drawing himself up proudly; "how so?"
Title:  
Title:  "The signs just now, and the holy water!  But that must be a
Title:  princess, at least--that lady with her Negro boy and her maid!"
Title:  
Title:  "My God!  Madame, you are deceived," said Porthos; "she is simply
Title:  a duchess."
Title:  
Title:  "And that running footman who waited at the door, and that
Title:  carriage with a coachman in grand livery who sat waiting on his
Title:  seat?"
Title:  
Title:  Porthos had seen neither the footman nor the carriage, but with
Title:  the eye of a jealous woman, Mme. Coquenard had seen everything.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of the
Title:  red cushion a princess.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you are quite the pet of the ladies, Monsieur Porthos!"
Title:  resumed the procurator's wife, with a sigh.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," responded Porthos, "you may imagine, with the physique
Title:  with which nature has endowed me, I am not in want of good luck."
Title:  
Title:  "Good Lord, how quickly men forget!" cried the procurator's wife,
Title:  raising her eyes toward heaven.
Title:  
Title:  "Less quickly than the women, it seems to me," replied Porthos;
Title:  "for I, madame, I may say I was your victim, when wounded, dying,
Title:  I was abandoned by the surgeons.  I, the offspring of a noble
Title:  family, who placed reliance upon your friendship--I was near
Title:  dying of my wounds at first, and of hunger afterward, in a
Title:  beggarly inn at Chantilly, without you ever deigning once to
Title:  reply to the burning letters I addressed to you."
Title:  
Title:  "But, Monsieur Porthos," murmured the procurator's wife, who
Title:  began to feel that, to judge by the conduct of the great ladies
Title:  of the time, she was wrong.
Title:  
Title:  "I, who had sacrificed for you the Baronne de--"
Title:  
Title:  "I know it well."
Title:  
Title:  "The Comtesse de--"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Porthos, be generous!"
Title:  
Title:  "You are right, madame, and I will not finish."
Title:  
Title:  "But it was my husband who would not hear of lending."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame Coquenard," said Porthos, "remember the first letter you
Title:  wrote me, and which I preserve engraved in my memory."
Title:  
Title:  The procurator's wife uttered a groan.
Title:  
Title:  "Besides," said she, "the sum you required me to borrow was
Title:  rather large."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame Coquenard, I gave you the preference.  I had but to write
Title:  to the Duchesse--but I won't repeat her name, for I am incapable
Title:  of compromising a woman; but this I know, that I had but to write
Title:  to her and she would have sent me fifteen hundred."
Title:  
Title:  The procurator's wife shed a tear.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Porthos," said she, "I can assure you that you have
Title:  severely punished me; and if in the time to come you should find
Title:  yourself in a similar situation, you have but to apply to me."
Title:  
Title:  "Fie, madame, fie!" said Porthos, as if disgusted.  "Let us not
Title:  talk about money, if you please; it is humiliating."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you no longer love me!" said the procurator's wife, slowly
Title:  and sadly.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos maintained a majestic silence.
Title:  
Title:  "And that is the only reply you make?  Alas, I understand."
Title:  
Title:  "Think of the offense you have committed toward me, madame!  It
Title:  remains HERE!" said Porthos, placing his hand on his heart, and
Title:  pressing it strongly.
Title:  
Title:  "I will repair it, indeed I will, my dear Porthos."
Title:  
Title:  "Besides, what did I ask of you?" resumed Porthos, with a
Title:  movement of the shoulders full of good fellowship.  "A loan,
Title:  nothing more!  After all, I am not an unreasonable man.  I know
Title:  you are not rich, Madame Coquenard, and that your husband is
Title:  obliged to bleed his poor clients to squeeze a few paltry crowns
Title:  from them.  Oh!  If you were a duchess, a marchioness, or a
Title:  countess, it would be quite a different thing; it would be
Title:  unpardonable."
Title:  
Title:  The procurator's wife was piqued.
Title:  
Title:  "Please to know, Monsieur Porthos," said she, "that my strongbox,
Title:  the strongbox of a procurator's wife though it may be, is better
Title:  filled than those of your affected minxes."
Title:  
Title:  "The doubles the offense," said Porthos, disengaging his arm from
Title:  that of the procurator's wife; "for if you are rich, Madame
Title:  Coquenard, then there is no excuse for your refusal."
Title:  
Title:  "When I said rich," replied the procurator's wife, who saw that
Title:  she had gone too far, "you must not take the word literally.  I
Title:  am not precisely rich, though I am pretty well off."
Title:  
Title:  "Hold, madame," said Porthos, "let us say no more upon the
Title:  subject, I beg of you.  You have misunderstood me, all sympathy
Title:  is extinct between us."
Title:  
Title:  "Ingrate that you are!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!  I advise you to complain!" said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Begone, then, to your beautiful duchess; I will detain you no
Title:  longer."
Title:  
Title:  "And she is not to be despised, in my opinion."
Title:  
Title:  "Now, Monsieur Porthos, once more, and this is the last!  Do you
Title:  love me still?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, madame," said Porthos, in the most melancholy tone he could
Title:  assume, "when we are about to enter upon a campaign--a campaign,
Title:  in which my presentiments tell me I shall be killed--"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, don't talk of such things!" cried the procurator's wife,
Title:  bursting into tears.
Title:  
Title:  "Something whispers me so," continued Porthos, becoming more and
Title:  more melancholy.
Title:  
Title:  "Rather say that you have a new love."
Title:  
Title:  "Not so; I speak frankly to you.  No object affects me; and I
Title:  even feel here, at the bottom of my heart, something which speaks
Title:  for you.  But in fifteen days, as you know, or as you do not
Title:  know, this fatal campaign is to open.  I shall be fearfully
Title:  preoccupied with my outfit.  Then I must make a journey to see my
Title:  family, in the lower part of Brittany, to obtain the sum
Title:  necessary for my departure."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice.
Title:  
Title:  "And as," continued he, "the duchess whom you saw at the church
Title:  has estates near to those of my family, we mean to make the
Title:  journey together.  Journeys, you know, appear much shorter when
Title:  we travel two in company."
Title:  
Title:  "Have you no friends in Paris, then, Monsieur Porthos?" said the
Title:  procurator's wife.
Title:  
Title:  "I thought I had," said Porthos, resuming his melancholy air;
Title:  "but I have been taught my mistake."
Title:  
Title:  "You have some!" cried the procurator's wife, in a transport that
Title:  surprised even herself.  "Come to our house tomorrow.  You are
Title:  the son of my aunt, consequently my cousin; you come from Noyon,
Title:  in Picardy; you have several lawsuits and no attorney.  Can you
Title:  recollect all that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Perfectly, madame."
Title:  
Title:  "Come at dinnertime."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well."
Title:  
Title:  "And be upon your guard before my husband, who is rather shrewd,
Title:  notwithstanding his seventy-six years."
Title:  
Title:  "Seventy-six years!  PESTE!  That's a fine age!" replied Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "A great age, you mean, Monsieur Porthos.  Yes, the poor man may
Title:  be expected to leave me a widow, any hour," continued she,
Title:  throwing a significant glance at Porthos.  "Fortunately, by our
Title:  marriage contract, the survivor takes everything."
Title:  
Title:  "All?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, all."
Title:  
Title:  "You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard,"
Title:  said Porthos, squeezing the hand of the procurator's wife
Title:  tenderly.
Title:  
Title:  "We are then reconciled, dear Monsieur Porthos?" said she,
Title:  simpering.
Title:  
Title:  "For life," replied Porthos, in the same manner.
Title:  
Title:  "Till we meet again, then, dear traitor!"
Title:  
Title:  "Till we meet again, my forgetful charmer!"
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow, my angel!"
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow, flame of my life!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  30  D'ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan followed Milady without being perceived by her.
Title:  He saw her get into her carriage, and heard her order the
Title:  coachman to drive to St. Germain.
Title:  
Title:  It was useless to try to keep pace on foot with a carriage
Title:  drawn by two powerful horses.  D'Artagnan therefore returned
Title:  to the Rue Ferou.
Title:  
Title:  In the Rue de Seine he met Planchet, who had stopped before
Title:  the house of a pastry cook, and was contemplating with
Title:  ecstasy a cake of the most appetizing appearance.
Title:  
Title:  He ordered him to go and saddle two horses in M. de
Title:  Treville's stables--one for himself, d'Artagnan, and one for
Title:  Planchet--and bring them to Athens's place.  Once for all,
Title:  Treville had placed his stable at d'Artagnan's service.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet proceeded toward the Rue du Colombier, and
Title:  d'Artagnan toward the Rue Ferou.  Athos was at home,
Title:  emptying sadly a bottle of the famous Spanish wine he had
Title:  brought back with him from his journey into Picardy.  He
Title:  made a sign for Grimaud to bring a glass for d'Artagnan, and
Title:  Grimaud obeyed as usual.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan related to Athos all that had passed at the
Title:  church between Porthos and the procurator's wife, and how
Title:  their comrade was probably by that time in a fair way to be
Title:  equipped.
Title:  
Title:  "As for me," replied Athos to this recital, "I am quite at
Title:  my ease; it will not be women that will defray the expense
Title:  of my outfit."
Title:  
Title:  "Handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear Athos,
Title:  neither princesses nor queens would be secure from your
Title:  amorous solicitations."
Title:  
Title:  "How young this d'Artagnan is!" said Athos, shrugging his
Title:  shoulders; and he made a sign to Grimaud to bring another
Title:  bottle.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment Planchet put his head modestly in at the
Title:  half-open door, and told his master that the horses were
Title:  ready.
Title:  
Title:  "What horses?" asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Two horses that Monsieur de Treville lends me at my
Title:  pleasure, and with which I am now going to take a ride to
Title:  St. Germain."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, and what are you going to do at St. Germain?" then
Title:  demanded Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Then d'Artagnan described the meeting which he had at the
Title:  church, and how he had found that lady who, with the
Title:  seigneur in the black cloak and with the scar near his
Title:  temple, filled his mind constantly.
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, you are in love with this lady as you were
Title:  with Madame Bonacieux," said Athos, shrugging his shoulders
Title:  contemptuously, as if he pitied human weakness.
Title:  
Title:  "I? not at all!" said d'Artagnan.  "I am only curious to
Title:  unravel the mystery to which she is attached.  I do not know
Title:  why, but I imagine that this woman, wholly unknown to me as
Title:  she is, and wholly unknown to her as I am, has an influence
Title:  over my life."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, perhaps you are right," said Athos.  "I do not know a
Title:  woman that is worth the trouble of being sought for when she
Title:  is once lost.  Madame Bonacieux is lost; so much the worse
Title:  for her if she is found."
Title:  
Title:  "No, Athos, no, you are mistaken," said d'Artagnan; "I love
Title:  my poor Constance more than ever, and if I knew the place in
Title:  which she is, were it at the end of the world, I would go to
Title:  free her from the hands of her enemies; but I am ignorant.
Title:  All my researches have been useless.  What is to be said?  I
Title:  must divert my attention!"
Title:  
Title:  "Amuse yourself with Milady, my dear d'Artagnan; I wish you
Title:  may with all my heart, if that will amuse you."
Title:  
Title:  "Hear me, Athos," said d'Artagnan.  "Instead of shutting
Title:  yourself up here as if you were under arrest, get on
Title:  horseback and come and take a ride with me to St. Germain."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear fellow," said Athos, "I ride horses when I have
Title:  any; when I have none, I go afoot."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said d'Artagnan, smiling at the misanthropy of
Title:  Athos, which from any other person would have offended him,
Title:  "I ride what I can get; I am not so proud as you.  So AU
Title:  REVOIR, dear Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "AU REVOIR," said the Musketeer, making a sign to Grimaud to
Title:  uncork the bottle he had just brought.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan and Planchet mounted, and took the road to St.
Title:  Germain.
Title:  
Title:  All along the road, what Athos had said respecting Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux recurred to the mind of the young man.  Although
Title:  d'Artagnan was not of a very sentimental character, the
Title:  mercer's pretty wife had made a real impression upon his
Title:  heart.  As he said, he was ready to go to the end of the
Title:  world to seek her; but the world, being round, has many
Title:  ends, so that he did not know which way to turn. Meantime,
Title:  he was going to try to find out Milady.  Milady had spoken
Title:  to the man in the black cloak; therefore she knew him. Now,
Title:  in the opinion of d'Artagnan, it was certainly the man in
Title:  the black cloak who had carried off Mme. Bonacieux the
Title:  second time, as he had carried her off the first.
Title:  d'Artagnan then only half-lied, which is lying but little,
Title:  when he said that by going in search of Milady he at the
Title:  same time went in search of Constance.
Title:  
Title:  Thinking of all this, and from time to time giving a touch
Title:  of the spur to his horse, d'Artagnan completed his short
Title:  journey, and arrived at St. Germain.  He had just passed by
Title:  the pavilion in which ten years later Louis XIV was born.
Title:  He rode up a very quiet street, looking to the right and the
Title:  left to see if he could catch any vestige of his beautiful
Title:  Englishwoman, when from the ground floor of a pretty house,
Title:  which, according to the fashion of the time, had no window
Title:  toward the street, he saw a face peep out with which he
Title:  thought he was acquainted.  This person walked along the
Title:  terrace, which was ornamented with flowers.  Planchet
Title:  recognized him first.
Title:  
Title:  "Eh, monsieur!" said he, addressing d'Artagnan, "don't you
Title:  remember that face which is blinking yonder?"
Title:  
Title:  "No," said d'Artagnan, "and yet I am certain it is not the
Title:  first time I have seen that visage."
Title:  
Title:  "PARBLEU, I believe it is not," said Planchet.  "Why, it is
Title:  poor Lubin, the lackey of the Comte de Wardes--he whom you
Title:  took such good care of a month ago at Calais, on the road to
Title:  the governor's country house!"
Title:  
Title:  "So it is!" said d'Artagnan; "I know him now.  Do you think
Title:  he would recollect you?"
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, monsieur, he was in such trouble that I doubt if
Title:  he can have retained a very clear recollection of me."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, go and talk with the boy," said d'Artagnan, "and make
Title:  out if you can from his conversation whether his master is
Title:  dead."
Title:  
Title:  Planchet dismounted and went straight up to Lubin, who did
Title:  not at all remember him, and the two lackeys began to chat
Title:  with the best understanding possible; while d'Artagnan
Title:  turned the two horses into a lane, went round the house, and
Title:  came back to watch the conference from behind a hedge of
Title:  filberts.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of an instant's observation he heard the noise of
Title:  a vehicle, and saw Milady's carriage stop opposite to him.
Title:  He could not be mistaken; Milady was in it.  D'Artagnan
Title:  leaned upon the neck of his horse, in order that he might
Title:  see without being seen.
Title:  
Title:  Milady put her charming blond head out at the window, and
Title:  gave her orders to her maid.
Title:  
Title:  The latter--a pretty girl of about twenty or twenty-two
Title:  years, active and lively, the true SOUBRETTE of a great
Title:  lady--jumped from the step upon which, according to the
Title:  custom of the time, she was seated, and took her way toward
Title:  the terrace upon which d'Artagnan had perceived Lubin.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan followed the soubrette with his eyes, and saw her
Title:  go toward the terrace; but it happened that someone in the
Title:  house called Lubin, so that Planchet remained alone, looking
Title:  in all directions for the road where d'Artagnan had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  The maid approached Planchet, whom she took for Lubin, and
Title:  holding out a little billet to him said, "For your master."
Title:  
Title:  "For my master?" replied Planchet, astonished.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, and important.  Take it quickly."
Title:  
Title:  Thereupon she ran toward the carriage, which had turned
Title:  round toward the way it came, jumped upon the step, and the
Title:  carriage drove off.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet turned and returned the billet.  Then, accustomed
Title:  to passive obedience, he jumped down from the terrace, ran
Title:  toward the lane, and at the end of twenty paces met
Title:  d'Artagnan, who, having seen all, was coming to him.
Title:  
Title:  "For you, monsieur," said Planchet, presenting the billet to
Title:  the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "For me?" said d'Artagnan; "are you sure of that?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARDIEU, monsieur, I can't be more sure.  The SOUBRETTE said,
Title:  'For your master.' I have no other master but you; so--
Title:  a pretty little lass, my faith, is that SOUBRETTE!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan opened the letter, and read these words:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "A person who takes more interest in you than she is willing
Title:  to confess wishes to know on what day it will suit you to
Title:  walk in the forest?  Tomorrow, at the Hotel Field of the
Title:  Cloth of Gold, a lackey in black and red will wait for your
Title:  reply."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!" said d'Artagnan, "this is rather warm; it appears that
Title:  Milady and I are anxious about the health of the same
Title:  person. Well, Planchet, how is the good Monsieur de Wardes?
Title:  He is not dead, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monsieur, he is as well as a man can be with four sword
Title:  wounds in his body; for you, without question, inflicted
Title:  four upon the dear gentleman, and he is still very weak,
Title:  having lost almost all his blood.  As I said, monsieur,
Title:  Lubin did not know me, and told me our adventure from one
Title:  end to the other."
Title:  
Title:  "Well done, Planchet! you are the king of lackeys.  Now jump
Title:  onto your horse, and let us overtake the carriage."
Title:  
Title:  This did not take long.  At the end of five minutes they
Title:  perceived the carriage drawn up by the roadside; a cavalier,
Title:  richly dressed, was close to the door.
Title:  
Title:  The conversation between Milady and the cavalier was so
Title:  animated that d'Artagnan stopped on the other side of the
Title:  carriage without anyone but the pretty SOUBRETTE perceiving
Title:  his presence.
Title:  
Title:  The conversation took place in English--a language which
Title:  d'Artagnan could not understand; but by the accent the young
Title:  man plainly saw that the beautiful Englishwoman was in a
Title:  great rage.  She terminated it by an action which left no
Title:  doubt as to the nature of this conversation; this was a blow
Title:  with her fan, applied with such force that the little
Title:  feminine weapon flew into a thousand pieces.
Title:  
Title:  The cavalier laughed aloud, which appeared to exasperate
Title:  Milady still more.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan thought this was the moment to interfere.  He
Title:  approached the other door, and taking off his hat
Title:  respectfully, said, "Madame, will you permit me to offer you
Title:  my services?  It appears to me that this cavalier has made
Title:  you very angry.  Speak one word, madame, and I take upon
Title:  myself to punish him for his want of courtesy."
Title:  
Title:  At the first word Milady turned, looking at the young man
Title:  with astonishment; and when he had finished, she said in
Title:  very good French, "Monsieur, I should with great confidence
Title:  place myself under your protection if the person with whom I
Title:  quarrel were not my brother."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, excuse me, then," said d'Artagnan.  "You must be aware
Title:  that I was ignorant of that, madame."
Title:  
Title:  "What is that stupid fellow troubling himself about?" cried
Title:  the cavalier whom Milady had designated as her brother,
Title:  stooping down to the height of the coach window.  "Why does
Title:  not he go about his business?"
Title:  
Title:  "Stupid fellow yourself!" said d'Artagnan, stooping in his
Title:  turn on the neck of his horse, and answering on his side
Title:  through the carriage window.  "I do not go on because it
Title:  pleases me to stop here."
Title:  
Title:  The cavalier addressed some words in English to his sister.
Title:  
Title:  "I speak to you in French," said d'Artagnan; "be kind
Title:  enough, then, to reply to me in the same language.  You are
Title:  Madame's brother, I learn--be it so; but fortunately you are
Title:  not mine."
Title:  
Title:  It might be thought that Milady, timid as women are in
Title:  general, would have interposed in this commencement of
Title:  mutual provocations in order to prevent the quarrel from
Title:  going too far; but on the contrary, she threw herself back
Title:  in her carriage, and called out coolly to the coachman,
Title:  "Go on--home!"
Title:  
Title:  The pretty SOUBRETTE cast an anxious glance at d'Artagnan,
Title:  whose good looks seemed to have made an impression on her.
Title:  
Title:  The carriage went on, and left the two men facing each
Title:  other; no material obstacle separated them.
Title:  
Title:  The cavalier made a movement as if to follow the carriage;
Title:  but d'Artagnan, whose anger, already excited, was much
Title:  increased by recognizing in him the Englishman of Amiens who
Title:  had won his horse and had been very near winning his diamond
Title:  of Athos, caught at his bridle and stopped him.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monsieur," said he, "you appear to be more stupid
Title:  than I am, for you forget there is a little quarrel to
Title:  arrange between us two."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said the Englishman, "is it you, my master?  It seems
Title:  you must always be playing some game or other."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; and that reminds me that I have a revenge to take.  We
Title:  will see, my dear monsieur, if you can handle a sword as
Title:  skillfully as you can a dice box."
Title:  
Title:  "You see plainly that I have no sword," said the Englishman.
Title:  "Do you wish to play the braggart with an unarmed man?"
Title:  
Title:  "I hope you have a sword at home; but at all events, I have
Title:  two, and if you like, I will throw with you for one of
Title:  them."
Title:  
Title:  "Needless," said the Englishman; "I am well furnished with
Title:  such playthings."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well, my worthy gentleman," replied d'Artagnan, "pick
Title:  out the longest, and come and show it to me this evening."
Title:  
Title:  "Where, if you please?"
Title:  
Title:  "Behind the Luxembourg; that's a charming spot for such
Title:  amusements as the one I propose to you."
Title:  
Title:  "That will do; I will be there."
Title:  
Title:  "Your hour?"
Title:  
Title:  "Six o'clock."
Title:  
Title:  "A PROPOS, you have probably one or two friends?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have three, who would be honored by joining in the sport
Title:  with me."
Title:  
Title:  "Three?  Marvelous!  That falls out oddly! Three is just my
Title:  number!"
Title:  
Title:  "Now, then, who are you?" asked the Englishman.
Title:  
Title:  "I am Monsieur d'Artagnan, a Gascon gentleman, serving in
Title:  the king's Musketeers.  And you?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am Lord de Winter, Baron Sheffield."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, I am your servant, Monsieur Baron," said
Title:  d'Artagnan, "though you have names rather difficult to
Title:  recollect."  And touching his horse with the spur, he
Title:  cantered back to Paris.  As he was accustomed to do in all
Title:  cases of any consequence, d'Artagnan went straight to the
Title:  residence of Athos.
Title:  
Title:  He found Athos reclining upon a large sofa, where he was
Title:  waiting, as he said, for his outfit to come and find him.
Title:  He related to Athos all that had passed, except the letter
Title:  to M. de Wardes.
Title:  
Title:  Athos was delighted to find he was going to fight an
Title:  Englishman. We might say that was his dream.
Title:  
Title:  They immediately sent their lackeys for Porthos and Aramis,
Title:  and on their arrival made them acquainted with the
Title:  situation.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos drew his sword from the scabbard, and made passes at
Title:  the wall, springing back from time to time, and making
Title:  contortions like a dancer.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis, who was constantly at work at his poem, shut himself
Title:  up in Athos's closet, and begged not to be disturbed before
Title:  the moment of drawing swords.
Title:  
Title:  Athos, by signs, desired Grimaud to bring another bottle of
Title:  wine.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan employed himself in arranging a little plan, of
Title:  which we shall hereafter see the execution, and which
Title:  promised him some agreeable adventure, as might be seen by
Title:  the smiles which from time to time passed over his
Title:  countenance, whose thoughtfulness they animated.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  31  ENGLISH AND FRENCH
Title:  
Title:  The hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to a
Title:  spot behind the Luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats.
Title:  Athos threw a piece of money to the goatkeeper to withdraw.
Title:  The lackeys were ordered to act as sentinels.
Title:  
Title:  A silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure,
Title:  entered, and joined the Musketeers.  Then, according to
Title:  foreign custom, the presentations took place.
Title:  
Title:  The Englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the odd
Title:  names of their adversaries were for them not only a matter
Title:  of surprise, but of annoyance.
Title:  
Title:  "But after all," said Lord de Winter, when the three friends
Title:  had been named, "we do not know who you are.  We cannot
Title:  fight with such names; they are names of shepherds."
Title:  
Title:  "Therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed
Title:  names," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Which only gives us a greater desire to know the real
Title:  ones," replied the Englishman.
Title:  
Title:  "You played very willingly with us without knowing our
Title:  names," said Athos, "by the same token that you won our
Title:  horses."
Title:  
Title:  "That is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; this
Title:  time we risk our blood.  One plays with anybody; but one
Title:  fights only with equals."
Title:  
Title:  "And that is but just," said Athos, and he took aside the
Title:  one of the four Englishmen with whom he was to fight, and
Title:  communicated his name in a low voice.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis did the same.
Title:  
Title:  "Does that satisfy you?" said Athos to his adversary.  "Do
Title:  you find me of sufficient rank to do me the honor of
Title:  crossing swords with me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," said the Englishman, bowing.
Title:  
Title:  "Well! now shall I tell you something?" added Athos, coolly.
Title:  
Title:  "What?" replied the Englishman.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, that is that you would have acted much more wisely if
Title:  you had not required me to make myself known."
Title:  
Title:  "Why so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because I am believed to be dead, and have reasons for
Title:  wishing nobody to know I am living; so that I shall be
Title:  obliged to kill you to prevent my secret from roaming over
Title:  the fields."
Title:  
Title:  The Englishman looked at Athos, believing that he jested,
Title:  but Athos did not jest the least in the world.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Athos, addressing at the same time his
Title:  companions and their adversaries, "are we ready?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes!" answered the Englishmen and the Frenchmen, as with
Title:  one voice.
Title:  
Title:  "On guard, then!" cried Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of the
Title:  setting sun, and the combat began with an animosity very
Title:  natural between men twice enemies.
Title:  
Title:  Athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he had
Title:  been practicing in a fencing school.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos, abated, no doubt, of his too-great confidence by
Title:  his adventure of Chantilly, played with skill and prudence.
Title:  Aramis, who had the third canto of his poem to finish,
Title:  behaved like a man in haste.
Title:  
Title:  Athos killed his adversary first.  He hit him but once, but
Title:  as he had foretold, that hit was a mortal one; the sword
Title:  pierced his heart.
Title:  
Title:  Second, Porthos stretched his upon the grass with a wound
Title:  through his thigh, As the Englishman, without making any
Title:  further resistance, then surrendered his sword, Porthos took
Title:  him up in his arms and bore him to his carriage.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fifty
Title:  paces, the man ended by fairly taking to his heels, and
Title:  disappeared amid the hooting of the lackeys.
Title:  
Title:  As to d'Artagnan, he fought purely and simply on the
Title:  defensive; and when he saw his adversary pretty well
Title:  fatigued, with a vigorous side thrust sent his sword flying.
Title:  The baron, finding himself disarmed, took two or three steps
Title:  back, but in this movement his foot slipped and he fell
Title:  backward.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was over him at a bound, and said to the
Title:  Englishman, pointing his sword to his throat, "I could kill
Title:  you, my Lord, you are completely in my hands; but I spare
Title:  your life for the sake of your sister."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was at the height of joy; he had realized the
Title:  plan he had imagined beforehand, whose picturing had
Title:  produced the smiles we noted upon his face.
Title:  
Title:  The Englishman, delighted at having to do with a gentleman
Title:  of such a kind disposition, pressed d'Artagnan in his arms,
Title:  and paid a thousand compliments to the three Musketeers, and
Title:  as Porthos's adversary was already installed in the
Title:  carriage, and as Aramis's had taken to his heels, they had
Title:  nothing to think about but the dead.
Title:  
Title:  As Porthos and Aramis were undressing him, in the hope of
Title:  finding his wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from his
Title:  clothes.  D'Artagnan picked it up and offered it to Lord de
Title:  Winter.
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil would you have me do with that?" said the
Title:  Englishman.
Title:  
Title:  "You can restore it to his family," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "His family will care much about such a trifle as that!  His
Title:  family will inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him.
Title:  Keep the purse for your lackeys."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan put the purse into his pocket.
Title:  
Title:  "And now, my young friend, for you will permit me, I hope,
Title:  to give you that name," said Lord de Winter, "on this very
Title:  evening, if agreeable to you, I will present you to my
Title:  sister, Milady Clarik, for I am desirous that she should
Title:  take you into her good graces; and as she is not in bad odor
Title:  at court, she may perhaps on some future day speak a word
Title:  that will not prove useless to you."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan blushed with pleasure, and bowed a sign of
Title:  assent.
Title:  
Title:  At this time Athos came up to d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean to do with that purse?" whispered he.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, I meant to pass it over to you, my dear Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "Me! why to me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, you killed him!  They are the spoils of victory."
Title:  
Title:  "I, the heir of an enemy!" said Athos; "for whom, then, do
Title:  you take me?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is the custom in war," said d'Artagnan, "why should it
Title:  not be the custom in a duel?"
Title:  
Title:  "Even on the field of battle, I have never done that."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos shrugged his shoulders; Aramis by a movement of his
Title:  lips endorsed Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said d'Artagnan, "let us give the money to the
Title:  lackeys, as Lord de Winter desired us to do."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Athos; "let us give the money to the lackeys--not
Title:  to our lackeys, but to the lackeys of the Englishmen."
Title:  
Title:  Athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the
Title:  coachman.  "For you and your comrades."
Title:  
Title:  This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute
Title:  struck even Porthos; and this French generosity, repeated by
Title:  Lord de Winter and his friend, was highly applauded, except
Title:  by MM. Grimaud, Bazin, Mousqueton and Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter, on quitting d'Artagnan, gave him his
Title:  sister's address.  She lived in the Place Royale--then the
Title:  fashionable quarter--at Number 6, and he undertook to call
Title:  and take d'Artagnan with him in order to introduce him.
Title:  d'Artagnan appointed eight o'clock at Athos's residence.
Title:  
Title:  This introduction to Milady Clarik occupied the head of our
Title:  Gascon greatly.  He remembered in what a strange manner this
Title:  woman had hitherto been mixed up in his destiny.  According
Title:  to his conviction, she was some creature of the cardinal,
Title:  and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn toward her by one
Title:  of those sentiments for which we cannot account.  His only
Title:  fear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meung
Title:  and of Dover.  Then she knew that he was one of the friends
Title:  of M. de Treville, and consequently, that he belonged body
Title:  and soul to the king; which would make him lose a part of
Title:  his advantage, since when known to Milady as he knew her, he
Title:  played only an equal game with her.  As to the commencement
Title:  of an intrigue between her and M.  de Wardes, our
Title:  presumptuous hero gave but little heed to that, although the
Title:  marquis was young, handsome, rich, and high in the
Title:  cardinal's favor.  It is not for nothing we are but twenty years old,
Title:  above all if we were born at Tarbes.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, then
Title:  returned to Athos's, and according to custom, related
Title:  everything to him.  Athos listened to his projects, then
Title:  shook his head, and recommended prudence to him with a shade
Title:  of bitterness.
Title:  
Title:  "What!" said he, "you have just lost one woman, whom you
Title:  call good, charming, perfect; and here you are, running
Title:  headlong after another."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.
Title:  
Title:  "I loved Madame Bonacieux with my heart, while I only love
Title:  Milady with my head," said he.  "In getting introduced to
Title:  her, my principal object is to ascertain what part she plays
Title:  at court."
Title:  
Title:  "The part she plays, PARDIEU!  It is not difficult to divine
Title:  that, after all you have told me.  She is some emissary of
Title:  the cardinal; a woman who will draw you into a snare in
Title:  which you will leave your head."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil! my dear Athos, you view things on the dark side,
Title:  methinks."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear fellow, I mistrust women.  Can it be otherwise?  I
Title:  bought my experience dearly--particularly fair women.  Milady
Title:  is fair, you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "She has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my poor d'Artagnan!" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen to me! I want to be enlightened on a subject; then,
Title:  when I shall have learned what I desire to know, I will
Title:  withdraw."
Title:  
Title:  "Be enlightened!" said Athos, phlegmatically.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter arrived at the appointed time; but Athos,
Title:  being warned of his coming, went into the other chamber.  He
Title:  therefore found d'Artagnan alone, and as it was nearly eight
Title:  o'clock he took the young man with him.
Title:  
Title:  An elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by two
Title:  excellent horses, they were soon at the Place Royale.
Title:  
Title:  Milady Clarik received d'Artagnan ceremoniously.  Her hotel
Title:  was remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of the
Title:  English had quit, or were about to quit, France on account
Title:  of the war, Milady had just been laying out much money upon
Title:  her residence; which proved that the general measure which
Title:  drove the English from France did not affect her.
Title:  
Title:  "You see," said Lord de Winter, presenting d'Artagnan to his
Title:  sister, "a young gentleman who has held my life in his
Title:  hands, and who has not abused his advantage, although we
Title:  have been twice enemies, although it was I who insulted him,
Title:  and although I am an Englishman.  Thank him, then, madame,
Title:  if you have any affection for me."
Title:  
Title:  Milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passed
Title:  over her brow, and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her
Title:  lips that the young man, who saw and observed this triple
Title:  shade, almost shuddered at it.
Title:  
Title:  The brother did not perceive this; he had turned round to
Title:  play with Milady's favorite monkey, which had pulled him by
Title:  the doublet.
Title:  
Title:  "You are welcome, monsieur," said Milady, in a voice whose
Title:  singular sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill-humor
Title:  which d'Artagnan had just remarked; "you have today acquired
Title:  eternal rights to my gratitude."
Title:  
Title:  The Englishman then turned round and described the combat
Title:  without omitting a single detail.  Milady listened with the
Title:  greatest attention, and yet it was easily to be perceived,
Title:  whatever effort she made to conceal her impressions, that
Title:  this recital was not agreeable to her.  The blood rose to
Title:  her head, and her little foot worked with impatience beneath
Title:  her robe.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter perceived nothing of this.  When he had
Title:  finished, he went to a table upon which was a salver with
Title:  Spanish wine and glasses.  He filled two glasses, and by a
Title:  sign invited d'Artagnan to drink.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an
Title:  Englishman to refuse to pledge him.  He therefore drew near
Title:  to the table and took the second glass.  He did not,
Title:  however, lose sight of Milady, and in a mirror he perceived
Title:  the change that came over her face. Now that she believed
Title:  herself to be no longer observed, a sentiment resembling
Title:  ferocity animated her countenance.  She bit her handkerchief
Title:  with her beautiful teeth.
Title:  
Title:  That pretty little SOUBRETTE whom d'Artagnan had already
Title:  observed then came in.  She spoke some words to Lord de
Title:  Winter in English, who thereupon requested d'Artagnan's
Title:  permission to retire, excusing himself on account of the
Title:  urgency of the business that had called him away, and
Title:  charging his sister to obtain his pardon.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with Lord de
Title:  Winter, and then returned to Milady.  Her countenance, with
Title:  surprising mobility, had recovered its gracious expression;
Title:  but some little red spots on her handkerchief indicated that
Title:  she had bitten her lips till the blood came.  Those lips
Title:  were magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.
Title:  
Title:  The conversation took a cheerful turn.  Milady appeared to
Title:  have entirely recovered.  She told d'Artagnan that Lord de
Title:  Winter was her brother-in-law, and not her brother.  She had
Title:  married a younger brother of the family, who had left her a
Title:  widow with one child.  This child was the only heir to Lord
Title:  de Winter, if Lord de Winter did not marry.  All this showed
Title:  d'Artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something;
Title:  but he could not yet see under this veil.
Title:  
Title:  In addition to this, after a half hour's conversation
Title:  d'Artagnan was convinced that Milady was his compatriot; she
Title:  spoke French with an elegance and a purity that left no
Title:  doubt on that head.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations
Title:  of devotion.  To all the simple things which escaped our
Title:  Gascon, Milady replied with a smile of kindness.  The hour
Title:  came for him to retire.  D'Artagnan took leave of Milady,
Title:  and left the saloon the happiest of men.
Title:  
Title:  On the staircase he met the pretty SOUBRETTE, who brushed
Title:  gently against him as she passed, and then, blushing to the
Title:  eyes, asked his pardon for having touched him in a voice so
Title:  sweet that the pardon was granted instantly.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still better
Title:  received than on the evening before.  Lord de Winter was not
Title:  at home; and it was Milady who this time did all the honors
Title:  of the evening.  She appeared to take a great interest in
Title:  him, asked him whence he came, who were his friends, and
Title:  whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself to
Title:  the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent
Title:  for a young man of twenty, then remembered his suspicions
Title:  regarding Milady.  He launched into a eulogy of his
Title:  Eminence, and said that he should not have failed to enter
Title:  into the Guards of the cardinal instead of the king's Guards
Title:  if he had happened to know M. de Cavois instead of M. de
Title:  Treville.
Title:  
Title:  Milady changed the conversation without any appearance of
Title:  affectation, and asked d'Artagnan in the most careless
Title:  manner possible if he had ever been in England.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan replied that he had been sent thither by M. de
Title:  Treville to treat for a supply of horses, and that he had
Title:  brought back four as specimens.
Title:  
Title:  Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit
Title:  her lips; she had to deal with a Gascon who played close.
Title:  
Title:  At the same hour as on the preceding evening, d'Artagnan
Title:  retired. In the corridor he again met the pretty Kitty; that
Title:  was the name of the SOUBRETTE.  She looked at him with an
Title:  expression of kindness which it was impossible to mistake;
Title:  but d'Artagnan was so preoccupied by the mistress that he
Title:  noticed absolutely nothing but her.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that,
Title:  and each day Milady gave him a more gracious reception.
Title:  
Title:  Every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, or
Title:  on the stairs, he met the pretty SOUBRETTE.  But, as we have
Title:  said, d'Artagnan paid no attention to this persistence of
Title:  poor Kitty.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  32  A PROCURATOR'S DINNER
Title:  
Title:  However brilliant had been the part played by Porthos in the
Title:  duel, it had not made him forget the dinner of the
Title:  procurator's wife.
Title:  
Title:  On the morrow he received the last touches of Mousqueton's
Title:  brush for an hour, and took his way toward the Rue aux Ours
Title:  with the steps of a man who was doubly in favor with
Title:  fortune.
Title:  
Title:  His heart beat, but not like d'Artagnan's with a young and
Title:  impatient love.  No; a more material interest stirred his
Title:  blood.  He was about at last to pass that mysterious
Title:  threshold, to climb those unknown stairs by which, one by
Title:  one, the old crowns of M. Coquenard had ascended.  He was
Title:  about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had
Title:  twenty times beheld the image in his dreams--a coffer long
Title:  and deep, locked, bolted, fastened in the wall; a coffer of
Title:  which he had so often heard, and which the hands--a little
Title:  wrinkled, it is true, but still not without elegance--of the
Title:  procurator's wife were about to open to his admiring looks.
Title:  
Title:  And then he--a wanderer on the earth, a man without fortune,
Title:  a man without family, a soldier accustomed to inns,
Title:  cabarets, taverns, and restaurants, a lover of wine forced
Title:  to depend upon chance treats--was about to partake of
Title:  family meals, to enjoy the pleasures of a comfortable
Title:  establishment, and to give himself up to those little
Title:  attentions which "the harder one is, the more they please,"
Title:  as old soldiers say.
Title:  
Title:  To come in the capacity of a cousin, and seat himself every
Title:  day at a good table; to smooth the yellow, wrinkled brow of
Title:  the old procurator; to pluck the clerks a little by teaching
Title:  them BASSETTE, PASSE-DIX, and LANSQUENET, in their utmost
Title:  nicety, and winning from them, by way of fee for the lesson
Title:  he would give them in an hour, their savings of a month--all
Title:  this was enormously delightful to Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  The Musketeer could not forget the evil reports which then
Title:  prevailed, and which indeed have survived them, of the
Title:  procurators of the period--meanness, stinginess, fasts; but
Title:  as, after all, excepting some few acts of economy which
Title:  Porthos had always found very unseasonable, the procurator's
Title:  wife had been tolerably liberal--that is, be it understood,
Title:  for a procurator's wife--he hoped to see a household of a
Title:  highly comfortable kind.
Title:  
Title:  And yet, at the very door the Musketeer began to entertain
Title:  some doubts.  The approach was not such as to prepossess
Title:  people--an ill-smelling, dark passage, a staircase half-
Title:  lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer from a
Title:  neighboring yard; on the first floor a low door studded with
Title:  enormous nails, like the principal gate of the Grand
Title:  Chatelet.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos knocked with his hand.  A tall, pale clerk, his face
Title:  shaded by a forest of virgin hair, opened the door, and
Title:  bowed with the air of a man forced at once to respect in
Title:  another lofty stature, which indicated strength, the
Title:  military dress, which indicated rank, and a ruddy
Title:  countenance, which indicated familiarity with good living.
Title:  
Title:  A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behind
Title:  the second, a stripling of a dozen years rising behind the
Title:  third.  In all, three clerks and a half, which, for the
Title:  time, argued a very extensive clientage.
Title:  
Title:  Although the Musketeer was not expected before one o'clock,
Title:  the procurator's wife had been on the watch ever since
Title:  midday, reckoning that the heart, or perhaps the stomach, of
Title:  her lover would bring him before his time.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Coquenard therefore entered the office from the house
Title:  at the same moment her guest entered from the stairs, and
Title:  the appearance of the worthy lady relieved him from an
Title:  awkward embarrassment.  The clerks surveyed him with great
Title:  curiosity, and he, not knowing well what to say to this
Title:  ascending and descending scale, remained tongue-tied.
Title:  
Title:  "It is my cousin!" cried the procurator's wife.  "Come in,
Title:  come in, Monsieur Porthos!"
Title:  
Title:  The name of Porthos produced its effect upon the clerks, who
Title:  began to laugh; but Porthos turned sharply round, and every
Title:  countenance quickly recovered its gravity.
Title:  
Title:  They reached the office of the procurator after having
Title:  passed through the antechamber in which the clerks were, and
Title:  the study in which they ought to have been.  This last
Title:  apartment was a sort of dark room, littered with papers.  On
Title:  quitting the study they left the kitchen on the right, and
Title:  entered the reception room.
Title:  
Title:  All these rooms, which communicated with one another, did
Title:  not inspire Porthos favorably.  Words might be heard at a
Title:  distance through all these open doors.  Then, while passing,
Title:  he had cast a rapid, investigating glance into the kitchen;
Title:  and he was obliged to confess to himself, to the shame of
Title:  the procurator's wife and his own regret, that he did not
Title:  see that fire, that animation, that bustle, which when a
Title:  good repast is on foot prevails generally in that sanctuary
Title:  of good living.
Title:  
Title:  The procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit,
Title:  as he expressed no surprise at the sight of Porthos, who
Title:  advanced toward him with a sufficiently easy air, and
Title:  saluted him courteously.
Title:  
Title:  "We are cousins, it appears, Monsieur Porthos?" said the
Title:  procurator, rising, yet supporting his weight upon the arms
Title:  of his cane chair.
Title:  
Title:  The old man, wrapped in a large black doublet, in which the
Title:  whole of his slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry.
Title:  His little gray eyes shone like carbuncles, and appeared,
Title:  with his grinning mouth, to be the only part of his face in
Title:  which life survived.  Unfortunately the legs began to refuse
Title:  their service to this bony machine.  During the last five or
Title:  six months that this weakness had been felt, the worthy
Title:  procurator had nearly become the slave of his wife.
Title:  
Title:  The cousin was received with resignation, that was all.  M.
Title:  Coquenard, firm upon his legs, would have declined all
Title:  relationship with M. Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur, we are cousins," said Porthos, without being
Title:  disconcerted, as he had never reckoned upon being received
Title:  enthusiastically by the husband.
Title:  
Title:  "By the female side, I believe?" said the procurator,
Title:  maliciously.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos did not feel the ridicule of this, and took it for a
Title:  piece of simplicity, at which he laughed in his large
Title:  mustache.  Mme. Coquenard, who knew that a simple-minded
Title:  procurator was a very rare variety in the species, smiled a
Title:  little, and colored a great deal.
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard had, since the arrival of Porthos, frequently
Title:  cast his eyes with great uneasiness upon a large chest
Title:  placed in front of his oak desk.  Porthos comprehended that
Title:  this chest, although it did not correspond in shape with
Title:  that which he had seen in his dreams, must be the blessed
Title:  coffer, and he congratulated himself that the reality was
Title:  several feet higher than the dream.
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigations
Title:  any further; but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest
Title:  and fixing it upon Porthos, he contented himself with saying,
Title:  "Monsieur our cousin will do us the favor of dining with us
Title:  once before his departure for the campaign, will he not,
Title:  Madame Coquenard?"
Title:  
Title:  This time Porthos received the blow right in his stomach,
Title:  and felt it.  It appeared likewise that Mme. Coquenard was
Title:  not less affected by it on her part, for she added, "My
Title:  cousin will not return if he finds that we do not treat him
Title:  kindly; but otherwise he has so little time to pass in Paris,
Title:  and consequently to spare to us, that we must entreat him to
Title:  give us every instant he can call his own previous to his
Title:  departure."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my legs, my poor legs! where are you?" murmured
Title:  Coquenard, and he tried to smile.
Title:  
Title:  This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which he
Title:  was attacked in his gastronomic hopes, inspired much
Title:  gratitude in the Musketeer toward the procurator's wife.
Title:  
Title:  The hour of dinner soon arrived.  They passed into the eating
Title:  room--a large dark room situated opposite the kitchen.
Title:  
Title:  The clerks, who, as it appeared, had smelled unusual perfumes
Title:  in the house, were of military punctuality, and held their
Title:  stools in hand quite ready to sit down.  Their jaws moved
Title:  preliminarily with fearful threatenings.
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!" thought Porthos, casting a glance at the three hungry
Title:  clerks--for the errand boy, as might be expected, was not
Title:  admitted to the honors of the magisterial table, "in my
Title:  cousin's place, I would not keep such gourmands!  They look
Title:  like shipwrecked sailors who have not eaten for six weeks."
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard entered, pushed along upon his armchair with
Title:  casters by Mme. Coquenard, whom Porthos assisted in rolling
Title:  her husband up to the table.  He had scarcely entered when
Title:  he began to agitate his nose and his jaws after the example
Title:  of his clerks.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, oh!" said he; "here is a soup which is rather
Title:  inviting."
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil can they smell so extraordinary in this
Title:  soup?" said Porthos, at the sight of a pale liquid, abundant
Title:  but entirely free from meat, on the surface of which a few
Title:  crusts swam about as rare as the islands of an archipelago.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyone
Title:  eagerly took his seat.
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard was served first, then Porthos.  Afterward Mme.
Title:  Coquenard filled her own plate, and distributed the crusts
Title:  without soup to the impatient clerks.  At this moment the
Title:  door of the dining room unclosed with a creak, and Porthos
Title:  perceived through the half-open flap the little clerk who,
Title:  not being allowed to take part in the feast, ate his dry
Title:  bread in the passage with the double odor of the dining room
Title:  and kitchen.
Title:  
Title:  After the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl--a piece of
Title:  magnificence which caused the eyes of the diners to dilate
Title:  in such a manner that they seemed ready to burst.
Title:  
Title:  "One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,"
Title:  said the procurator, with a smile that was almost tragic.
Title:  "You are certainly treating your cousin very handsomely!"
Title:  
Title:  The poor fowl was thin, and covered with one of those thick,
Title:  bristly skins through which the teeth cannot penetrate with
Title:  all their efforts.  The fowl must have been sought for a
Title:  long time on the perch, to which it had retired to die of
Title:  old age.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" thought Porthos, "this is poor work.  I respect
Title:  old age, but I don't much like it boiled or roasted."
Title:  
Title:  And he looked round to see if anybody partook of his
Title:  opinion; but on the contrary, he saw nothing but eager eyes
Title:  which were devouring, in anticipation, that sublime fowl
Title:  which was the object of his contempt.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Coquenard drew the dish toward her, skillfully detached
Title:  the two great black feet, which she placed upon her
Title:  husband's plate, cut off the neck, which with the head she
Title:  put on one side for herself, raised the wing for Porthos,
Title:  and then returned the bird otherwise intact to the servant
Title:  who had brought it in, who disappeared with it before the
Title:  Musketeer had time to examine the variations which
Title:  disappointment produces upon faces, according to the
Title:  characters and temperaments of those who experience it.
Title:  
Title:  In the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made its
Title:  appearance--an enormous dish in which some bones of mutton
Title:  that at first sight one might have believed to have some
Title:  meat on them pretended to show themselves.
Title:  
Title:  But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and their
Title:  lugubrious looks settled down into resigned countenances.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Coquenard distributed this dish to the young men with
Title:  the moderation of a good housewife.
Title:  
Title:  The time for wine came.  M. Coquenard poured from a very
Title:  small stone bottle the third of a glass for each of the
Title:  young men, served himself in about the same proportion, and
Title:  passed the bottle to Porthos and Mme. Coquenard.
Title:  
Title:  The young men filled up their third of a glass with water;
Title:  then, when they had drunk half the glass, they filled it up
Title:  again, and continued to do so.  This brought them, by the
Title:  end of the repast, to swallowing a drink which from the
Title:  color of the ruby had passed to that of a pale topaz.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly, and shuddered when
Title:  he felt the knee of the procurator's wife under the table,
Title:  as it came in search of his.  He also drank half a glass of
Title:  this sparingly served wine, and found it to be nothing but
Title:  that horrible Montreuil--the terror of all expert palates.
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted, and
Title:  sighed deeply.
Title:  
Title:  "Will you eat any of these beans, Cousin Porthos?" said Mme.
Title:  Coquenard, in that tone which says, "Take my advice, don't
Title:  touch them."
Title:  
Title:  "Devil take me if I taste one of them!" murmured Porthos to
Title:  himself, and then said aloud, "Thank you, my cousin, I am no
Title:  longer hungry."
Title:  
Title:  There was silence.  Porthos could hardly keep his
Title:  countenance.
Title:  
Title:  The procurator repeated several times, "Ah, Madame
Title:  Coquenard!  Accept my compliments; your dinner has been a
Title:  real feast.  Lord, how I have eaten!"
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard had eaten his soup, the black feet of the fowl,
Title:  and the only mutton bone on which there was the least
Title:  appearance of meat.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos fancied they were mystifying him, and began to curl
Title:  his mustache and knit his eyebrows; but the knee of Mme.
Title:  Coquenard gently advised him to be patient.
Title:  
Title:  This silence and this interruption in serving, which were
Title:  unintelligible to Porthos, had, on the contrary, a terrible
Title:  meaning for the clerks.  Upon a look from the procurator,
Title:  accompanied by a smile from Mme. Coquenard, they arose
Title:  slowly from the table, folded their napkins more slowly
Title:  still, bowed, and retired.
Title:  
Title:  "Go, young men! go and promote digestion by working," said
Title:  the procurator, gravely.
Title:  
Title:  The clerks gone, Mme. Coquenard rose and took from a buffet
Title:  a piece of cheese, some preserved quinces, and a cake which
Title:  she had herself made of almonds and honey.
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too many
Title:  good things.  Porthos bit his lips because he saw not the
Title:  wherewithal to dine.  He looked to see if the dish of beans
Title:  was still there; the dish of beans had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  "A positive feast!" cried M. Coquenard, turning about in his
Title:  chair, "a real feast, EPULCE EPULORUM.  Lucullus dines with
Title:  Lucullus."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos looked at the bottle, which was near him, and hoped
Title:  that with wine, bread, and cheese, he might make a dinner;
Title:  but wine was wanting, the bottle was empty.  M. and Mme.
Title:  Coquenard did not seem to observe it.
Title:  
Title:  "This is fine!" said Porthos to himself; "I am prettily
Title:  caught!"
Title:  
Title:  He passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves, and stuck
Title:  his teeth into the sticky pastry of Mme. Coquenard.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said he, "the sacrifice is consummated!  Ah! if I had
Title:  not the hope of peeping with Madame Coquenard into her
Title:  husband's chest!"
Title:  
Title:  M. Coquenard, after the luxuries of such a repast, which he
Title:  called an excess, felt the want of a siesta.  Porthos began
Title:  to hope that the thing would take place at the present
Title:  sitting, and in that same locality; but the procurator would
Title:  listen to nothing, he would be taken to his room, and was
Title:  not satisfied till he was close to his chest, upon the edge
Title:  of which, for still greater precaution, he placed his feet.
Title:  
Title:  The procurator's wife took Porthos into an adjoining room,
Title:  and they began to lay the basis of a reconciliation.
Title:  
Title:  "You can come and dine three times a week," said Mme.
Title:  Coquenard.
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, madame!" said Porthos, "but I don't like to abuse
Title:  your kindness; besides, I must think of my outfit!"
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said the procurator's wife, groaning, "that
Title:  unfortunate outfit!"
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, yes," said Porthos, "it is so."
Title:  
Title:  "But of what, then, does the equipment of your company
Title:  consist, Monsieur Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, of many things!" said Porthos.  "The Musketeers are, as
Title:  you know, picked soldiers, and they require many things
Title:  useless to the Guardsmen or the Swiss."
Title:  
Title:  "But yet, detail them to me."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, they may amount to--", said Porthos, who preferred
Title:  discussing the total to taking them one by one.
Title:  
Title:  The procurator's wife waited tremblingly.
Title:  
Title:  "To how much?" said she.  "I hope it does not exceed--" She
Title:  stopped; speech failed her.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no," said Porthos, "it does not exceed two thousand
Title:  five hundred livres!  I even think that with economy I could
Title:  manage it with two thousand livres."
Title:  
Title:  "Good God!" cried she, "two thousand livres! Why, that is a
Title:  fortune!"
Title:  
Title:  Porthos made a most significant grimace; Mme. Coquenard
Title:  understood it.
Title:  
Title:  "I wished to know the detail," said she, "because, having
Title:  many relatives in business, I was almost sure of obtaining
Title:  things at a hundred per cent less than you would pay
Title:  yourself."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "that is what you meant to say!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, dear Monsieur Porthos.  Thus, for instance, don't you
Title:  in the first place want a horse?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, a horse."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then!  I can just suit you."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!" said Porthos, brightening, "that's well as regards my
Title:  horse; but I must have the appointments complete, as they
Title:  include objects which a Musketeer alone can purchase, and
Title:  which will not amount, besides, to more than three hundred
Title:  livres."
Title:  
Title:  "Three hundred livres?  Then put down three hundred livres,"
Title:  said the procurator's wife, with a sigh.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos smiled.  It may be remembered that he had the saddle
Title:  which came from Buckingham.  These three hundred livres he
Title:  reckoned upon putting snugly into his pocket.
Title:  
Title:  "Then," continued he, "there is a horse for my lackey, and
Title:  my valise.  As to my arms, it is useless to trouble you
Title:  about them; I have them."
Title:  
Title:  "A horse for your lackey?" resumed the procurator's wife,
Title:  hesitatingly; "but that is doing things in lordly style, my
Title:  friend."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, madame!" said Porthos, haughtily; "do you take me for a
Title:  beggar?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; I only thought that a pretty mule makes sometimes as
Title:  good an appearance as a horse, and it seemed to me that by
Title:  getting a pretty mule for Mousqueton--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, agreed for a pretty mule," said Porthos; "you are
Title:  right, I have seen very great Spanish nobles whose whole
Title:  suite were mounted on mules.  But then you understand,
Title:  Madame Coquenard, a mule with feathers and bells."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied," said the procurator's wife.
Title:  
Title:  "There remains the valise," added Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, don't let that disturb you," cried Mme. Coquenard.  "My
Title:  husband has five or six valises; you shall choose the best.
Title:  There is one in particular which he prefers in his journeys,
Title:  large enough to hold all the world."
Title:  
Title:  "Your valise is then empty?" asked Porthos, with simplicity.
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly it is empty," replied the procurator's wife, in
Title:  real innocence.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, but the valise I want," cried Porthos, "is a well-
Title:  filled one, my dear."
Title:  
Title:  Madame uttered fresh sighs.  Moliere had not written his
Title:  scene in "L'Avare" then.  Mme. Coquenard was in the dilemma
Title:  of Harpagan.
Title:  
Title:  Finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debated
Title:  in the same manner; and the result of the sitting was that
Title:  the procurator's wife should give eight hundred livres in
Title:  money, and should furnish the horse and the mule which
Title:  should have the honor of carrying Porthos and Mousqueton to
Title:  glory.
Title:  
Title:  These conditions being agreed to, Porthos took leave of Mme.
Title:  Coquenard.  The latter wished to detain him by darting
Title:  certain tender glances; but Porthos urged the commands of
Title:  duty, and the procurator's wife was obliged to give place to
Title:  the king.
Title:  
Title:  The Musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  33  SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of his
Title:  conscience and the wise counsels of Athos, d'Artagnan became
Title:  hourly more in love with Milady.  Thus he never failed to
Title:  pay his diurnal court to her; and the self-satisfied Gascon
Title:  was convinced that sooner or later she could not fail to
Title:  respond.
Title:  
Title:  One day, when he arrived with his head in the air, and as
Title:  light at heart as a man who awaits a shower of gold, he
Title:  found the SOUBRETTE under the gateway of the hotel; but this
Title:  time the pretty Kitty was not contented with touching him as
Title:  he passed, she took him gently by the hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Good!" thought d'Artagnan, "She is charged with some
Title:  message for me from her mistress; she is about to appoint
Title:  some rendezvous of which she had not courage to speak."  And
Title:  he looked down at the pretty girl with the most triumphant
Title:  air imaginable.
Title:  
Title:  "I wish to say three words to you, Monsieur Chevalier,"
Title:  stammered the SOUBRETTE.
Title:  
Title:  "Speak, my child, speak," said d'Artagnan; "I listen."
Title:  
Title:  "Here?  Impossible!  That which I have to say is too long,
Title:  and above all, too secret."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what is to be done?"
Title:  
Title:  "If Monsieur Chevalier would follow me?" said Kitty,
Title:  timidly.
Title:  
Title:  "Where you please, my dear child."
Title:  
Title:  "Come, then."
Title:  
Title:  And Kitty, who had not let go the hand of d'Artagnan, led
Title:  him up a little dark, winding staircase, and after ascending
Title:  about fifteen steps, opened a door.
Title:  
Title:  "Come in here, Monsieur Chevalier," said she; "here we shall
Title:  be alone, and can talk."
Title:  
Title:  "And whose room is this, my dear child?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is mine, Monsieur Chevalier; it communicates with my
Title:  mistress's by that door.  But you need not fear.  She will
Title:  not hear what we say; she never goes to bed before
Title:  midnight."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan cast a glance around him.  The little apartment
Title:  was charming for its taste and neatness; but in spite of
Title:  himself, his eyes were directed to that door which Kitty
Title:  said led to Milady's chamber.
Title:  
Title:  Kitty guessed what was passing in the mind of the young man,
Title:  and heaved a deep sigh.
Title:  
Title:  "You love my mistress, then, very dearly, Monsieur
Title:  Chevalier?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, more than I can say, Kitty! I am mad for her!"
Title:  
Title:  Kitty breathed a second sigh.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, monsieur," said she, "that is too bad."
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil do you see so bad in it?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Because, monsieur," replied Kitty, "my mistress loves you
Title:  not at all."
Title:  
Title:  "HEIN!" said d'Artagnan, "can she have charged you to tell
Title:  me so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no, monsieur; but out of the regard I have for you, I
Title:  have taken the resolution to tell you so."
Title:  
Title:  "Much obliged, my dear Kitty; but for the intention only--for
Title:  the information, you must agree, is not likely to be at all
Title:  agreeable."
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, you don't believe what I have told you; is
Title:  it not so?"
Title:  
Title:  "We have always some difficulty in believing such things, my
Title:  pretty dear, were it only from self-love."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you don't believe me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I confess that unless you deign to give me some proof of
Title:  what you advance--"
Title:  
Title:  "What do you think of this?"
Title:  
Title:  Kitty drew a little note from her bosom.
Title:  
Title:  "For me?" said d'Artagnan, seizing the letter.
Title:  
Title:  "No; for another."
Title:  
Title:  "For another?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "His name; his name!" cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Read the address."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur El Comte de Wardes."
Title:  
Title:  The remembrance of the scene at St. Germain presented itself
Title:  to the mind of the presumptuous Gascon.  As quick as
Title:  thought, he tore open the letter, in spite of the cry which
Title:  Kitty uttered on seeing what he was going to do, or rather,
Title:  what he was doing.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, good Lord, Monsieur Chevalier," said she, "what are you
Title:  doing?"
Title:  
Title:  "I?" said d'Artagnan; "nothing," and he read,
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "You have not answered my first note.  Are you indisposed,
Title:  or have you forgotten the glances you favored me with at the
Title:  ball of Mme. de Guise?  You have an opportunity now, Count;
Title:  do not allow it to escape."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  d'Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his SELF-
Title:  love: he thought that it was in his LOVE.
Title:  
Title:  "Poor dear Monsieur d'Artagnan," said Kitty, in a voice full
Title:  of compassion, and pressing anew the young man's hand.
Title:  
Title:  "You pity me, little one?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, and with all my heart; for I know what it is to be
Title:  in love."
Title:  
Title:  "You know what it is to be in love?" said d'Artagnan,
Title:  looking at her for the first time with much attention.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much better
Title:  to assist me in avenging myself on your mistress."
Title:  
Title:  "And what sort of revenge would you take?"
Title:  
Title:  "I would triumph over her, and supplant my rival."
Title:  
Title:  "I will never help you in that, Monsieur Chevalier," said
Title:  Kitty, warmly.
Title:  
Title:  "And why not?" demanded d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "For two reasons."
Title:  
Title:  "What ones?"
Title:  
Title:  "The first is that my mistress will never love you."
Title:  
Title:  "How do you know that?"
Title:  
Title:  "You have cut her to the heart."
Title:  
Title:  "I? In what can I have offended her--I who ever since I have
Title:  known her have lived at her feet like a slave?  Speak, I beg
Title:  you!"
Title:  
Title:  "I will never confess that but to the man--who should read to
Title:  the bottom of my soul!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan looked at Kitty for the second time.  The young
Title:  girl had freshness and beauty which many duchesses would
Title:  have purchased with their coronets.
Title:  
Title:  "Kitty," said he, "I will read to the bottom of your soul
Title:  when-ever you like; don't let that disturb you." And he gave
Title:  her a kiss at which the poor girl became as red as a cherry.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no," said Kitty, "it is not me you love!  It is my
Title:  mistress you love; you told me so just now."
Title:  
Title:  "And does that hinder you from letting me know the second
Title:  reason?"
Title:  
Title:  "The second reason, Monsieur the Chevalier," replied Kitty,
Title:  emboldened by the kiss in the first place, and still further
Title:  by the expression of the eyes of the young man, "is that in
Title:  love, everyone for herself!"
Title:  
Title:  Then only d'Artagnan remembered the languishing glances of
Title:  Kitty, her constantly meeting him in the antechamber, the
Title:  corridor, or on the stairs, those touches of the hand every
Title:  time she met him, and her deep sighs; but absorbed by his
Title:  desire to please the great lady, he had disdained the
Title:  soubrette.  He whose game is the eagle takes no heed of the
Title:  sparrow.
Title:  
Title:  But this time our Gascon saw at a glance all the advantage
Title:  to be derived from the love which Kitty had just confessed
Title:  so innocently, or so boldly: the interception of letters
Title:  addressed to the Comte de Wardes, news on the spot, entrance
Title:  at all hours into Kitty's chamber, which was contiguous to
Title:  her mistress's.  The perfidious deceiver was, as may plainly
Title:  be perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poor
Title:  girl in order to obtain Milady, willy-nilly.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said he to the young girl, "are you willing, my dear
Title:  Kitty, that I should give you a proof of that love which you
Title:  doubt?"
Title:  
Title:  "What love?" asked the young girl.
Title:  
Title:  "Of that which I am ready to feel toward you."
Title:  
Title:  "And what is that proof?"
Title:  
Title:  "Are you willing that I should this evening pass with you
Title:  the time I generally spend with your mistress?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes," said Kitty, clapping her hands, "very willing."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, come here, my dear," said d'Artagnan,
Title:  establishing himself in an easy chair; "come, and let me
Title:  tell you that you are the prettiest SOUBRETTE I ever saw!"
Title:  
Title:  And he did tell her so much, and so well, that the poor
Title:  girl, who asked nothing better than to believe him, did
Title:  believe him. Nevertheless, to d'Artagnan's great
Title:  astonishment, the pretty Kitty defended herself resolutely.
Title:  
Title:  Time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks and
Title:  defenses.  Midnight sounded, and almost at the same time the
Title:  bell was rung in Milady's chamber.
Title:  
Title:  "Good God," cried Kitty, "there is my mistress calling me!
Title:  Go; go directly!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan rose, took his hat, as if it had been his
Title:  intention to obey, then, opening quickly the door of a large
Title:  closet instead of that leading to the staircase, he buried
Title:  himself amid the robes and dressing gowns of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "What are you doing?" cried Kitty.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, who had secured the key, shut himself up in the
Title:  closet without reply.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," cried Milady, in a sharp voice.  "Are you asleep,
Title:  that you don't answer when I ring?"
Title:  
Title:  And d'Artagnan heard the door of communication opened
Title:  violently.
Title:  
Title:  "Here am I, Milady, here am I!" cried Kitty, springing
Title:  forward to meet her mistress.
Title:  
Title:  Both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communication
Title:  remained open, d'Artagnan could hear Milady for some time
Title:  scolding her maid.  She was at length appeased, and the
Title:  conversation turned upon him while Kitty was assisting her
Title:  mistress.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Milady, "I have not seen our Gascon this
Title:  evening."
Title:  
Title:  "What, Milady! has he not come?" said Kitty.  "Can he be
Title:  inconstant before being happy?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no; he must have been prevented by Monsieur de Treville
Title:  or Monsieur Dessessart.  I understand my game, Kitty; I have
Title:  this one safe."
Title:  
Title:  "What will you do with him, madame?"
Title:  
Title:  "What will I do with him?  Be easy, Kitty, there is
Title:  something between that man and me that he is quite ignorant
Title:  of: he nearly made me lose my credit with his Eminence. Oh,
Title:  I will be revenged!"
Title:  
Title:  "I believed that Madame loved him."
Title:  
Title:  "I love him?  I detest him! An idiot, who held the life of
Title:  Lord de Winter in his hands and did not kill him, by which I
Title:  missed three hundred thousand livres' income."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said Kitty; "your son was the only heir of
Title:  his uncle, and until his majority you would have had the
Title:  enjoyment of his fortune."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave
Title:  creature reproach him, with that sharp voice which she took
Title:  such pains to conceal in conversation, for not having killed
Title:  a man whom he had seen load her with kindnesses.
Title:  
Title:  "For all this," continued Milady, "I should long ago have
Title:  revenged myself on him if, and I don't know why, the
Title:  cardinal had not requested me to conciliate him."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes; but Madame has not conciliated that little woman
Title:  he was so fond of."
Title:  
Title:  "What, the mercer's wife of the Rue des Fossoyeurs?  Has he
Title:  not already forgotten she ever existed?  Fine vengeance
Title:  that, on my faith!"
Title:  
Title:  A cold sweat broke from d'Artagnan's brow.  Why, this woman
Title:  was a monster! He resumed his listening, but unfortunately
Title:  the toilet was finished.
Title:  
Title:  "That will do," said Milady; "go into your own room, and
Title:  tomorrow endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter I
Title:  gave you."
Title:  
Title:  "For Monsieur de Wardes?" said Kitty.
Title:  
Title:  "To be sure; for Monsieur de Wardes."
Title:  
Title:  "Now, there is one," said Kitty, "who appears to me quite a
Title:  different sort of a man from that poor Monsieur d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "Go to bed, mademoiselle," said Milady; "I don't like
Title:  comments."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan heard the door close; then the noise of two bolts
Title:  by which Milady fastened herself in.  On her side, but as
Title:  softly as possible, Kitty turned the key of the lock, and
Title:  then d'Artagnan opened the closet door.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, good Lord!" said Kitty, in a low voice, "what is the
Title:  matter with you?  How pale you are!"
Title:  
Title:  "The abominable creature" murmured d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, silence, begone!" said Kitty.  "There is nothing
Title:  but a wainscot between my chamber and Milady's; every word
Title:  that is uttered in one can be heard in the other."
Title:  
Title:  "That's exactly the reason I won't go," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "What!" said Kitty, blushing.
Title:  
Title:  "Or, at least, I will go--later."
Title:  
Title:  He drew Kitty to him.  She had the less motive to resist,
Title:  resistance would make so much noise.  Therefore Kitty
Title:  surrendered.
Title:  
Title:  It was a movement of vengeance upon Milady.  D'Artagnan
Title:  believed it right to say that vengeance is the pleasure of
Title:  the gods.  With a little more heart, he might have been
Title:  contented with this new conquest; but the principal features
Title:  of his character were ambition and pride.  It must, however,
Title:  be confessed in his justification that the first use he made
Title:  of his influence over Kitty was to try and find out what had
Title:  become of Mme. Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon the
Title:  crucifix to d'Artagnan that she was entirely ignorant on
Title:  that head, her mistress never admitting her into half her
Title:  secrets--only she believed she could say she was not dead.
Title:  
Title:  As to the cause which was near making Milady lose her credit
Title:  with the cardinal, Kitty knew nothing about it; but this
Title:  time d'Artagnan was better informed than she was.  As he had
Title:  seen Milady on board a vessel at the moment he was leaving
Title:  England, he suspected that it was, almost without a doubt,
Title:  on account of the diamond studs.
Title:  
Title:  But what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred,
Title:  the profound hatred, the inveterate hatred of Milady, was
Title:  increased by his not having killed her brother-in-law.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan came the next day to Milady's, and finding her in
Title:  a very ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answer
Title:  from M. de Wardes that provoked her thus.  Kitty came in,
Title:  but Milady was very cross with her.  The poor girl ventured
Title:  a glance at d'Artagnan which said, "See how I suffer on your
Title:  account!"
Title:  
Title:  Toward the end of the evening, however, the beautiful
Title:  lioness became milder; she smilingly listened to the soft
Title:  speeches of d'Artagnan, and even gave him her hand to kiss.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but as
Title:  he was a youth who did not easily lose his head, while
Title:  continuing to pay his court to Milady, he had framed a
Title:  little plan in his mind.
Title:  
Title:  He found Kitty at the gate, and, as on the preceding
Title:  evening, went up to her chamber.  Kitty had been accused of
Title:  negligence and severely scolded.  Milady could not at all
Title:  comprehend the silence of the Comte de Wardes, and she
Title:  ordered Kitty to come at nine o'clock in the morning to take
Title:  a third letter.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan made Kitty promise to bring him that letter on
Title:  the following morning.  The poor girl promised all her lover
Title:  desired; she was mad.
Title:  
Title:  Things passed as on the night before.  D'Artagnan concealed
Title:  himself in his closet; Milady called, undressed, sent away
Title:  Kitty, and shut the door.  As the night before, d'Artagnan
Title:  did not return home till five o'clock in the morning.
Title:  
Title:  At eleven o'clock Kitty came to him.  She held in her hand a
Title:  fresh billet from Milady.  This time the poor girl did not
Title:  even argue with d'Artagnan; she gave it to him at once. She
Title:  belonged body and soul to her handsome soldier.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  This is the third time I have written to you to tell you
Title:  that I love you.  Beware that I do not write to you a fourth
Title:  time to tell you that I detest you.
Title:  
Title:  If you repent of the manner in which you have acted toward
Title:  me, the young girl who brings you this will tell you how a
Title:  man of spirit may obtain his pardon.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  d'Artagnan colored and grew pale several times in reading
Title:  this billet.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you love her still," said Kitty, who had not taken her
Title:  eyes off the young man's countenance for an instant.
Title:  
Title:  "No, Kitty, you are mistaken.  I do not love her, but I will
Title:  avenge myself for her contempt."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, I know what sort of vengeance!  You told me that!"
Title:  
Title:  "What matters it to you, Kitty?  You know it is you alone
Title:  whom I love."
Title:  
Title:  "How can I know that?"
Title:  
Title:  "By the scorn I will throw upon her."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took a pen and wrote:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Madame, Until the present moment I could not believe that it
Title:  was to me your first two letters were addressed, so unworthy
Title:  did I feel myself of such an honor; besides, I was so
Title:  seriously indisposed that I could not in any case have
Title:  replied to them.
Title:  
Title:  But now I am forced to believe in the excess of your
Title:  kindness, since not only your letter but your servant
Title:  assures me that I have the good fortune to be beloved by
Title:  you.
Title:  
Title:  She has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of
Title:  spirit may obtain his pardon.  I will come and ask mine at
Title:  eleven o'clock this evening.
Title:  
Title:  To delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit a
Title:  fresh offense.
Title:  
Title:  From him whom you have rendered the happiest of men,
Title:  Comte de Wardes
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  This note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewise
Title:  an indelicacy.  It was even, according to our present
Title:  manners, something like an infamous action; but at that
Title:  period people did not manage affairs as they do today.
Title:  Besides, d'Artagnan from her own admission knew Milady
Title:  culpable of treachery in matters more important, and could
Title:  entertain no respect for her.  And yet, notwithstanding this
Title:  want of respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for this
Title:  woman boiling in his veins--passion drunk with contempt; but
Title:  passion or thirst, as the reader pleases.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan's plan was very simple.  By Kitty's chamber he
Title:  could gain that of her mistress.  He would take advantage of
Title:  the first moment of surprise, shame, and terror, to triumph
Title:  over her.  He might fail, but something must be left to
Title:  chance.  In eight days the campaign would open, and he would
Title:  be compelled to leave Paris; d'Artagnan had no time for a
Title:  prolonged love siege.
Title:  
Title:  "There," said the young man, handing Kitty the letter
Title:  sealed; "give that to Milady.  It is the count's reply."
Title:  
Title:  Poor Kitty became as pale as death; she suspected what the
Title:  letter contained.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen, my dear girl," said d'Artagnan; "you cannot but
Title:  perceive that all this must end, some way or other.  Milady
Title:  may discover that you gave the first billet to my lackey
Title:  instead of to the count's; that it is I who have opened the
Title:  others which ought to have been opened by de Wardes.  Milady
Title:  will then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not the
Title:  woman to limit her vengeance."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas!" said Kitty, "for whom have I exposed myself to all that?"
Title:  
Title:  "For me, I well know, my sweet girl," said d'Artagnan.  "But
Title:  I am grateful, I swear to you."
Title:  
Title:  "But what does this note contain?"
Title:  
Title:  "Milady will tell you."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you do not love me!" cried Kitty, "and I am very
Title:  wretched."
Title:  
Title:  To this reproach there is always one response which deludes
Title:  women.  D'Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kitty
Title:  remained in her great delusion.  Although she cried freely
Title:  before deciding to transmit the letter to her mistress, she
Title:  did at last so decide, which was all d'Artagnan wished.
Title:  Finally he promised that he would leave her mistress's
Title:  presence at an early hour that evening, and that when he
Title:  left the mistress he would ascend with the maid. This
Title:  promise completed poor Kitty's consolation.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  34  IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED
Title:  OF
Title:  
Title:  Since the four friends had been each in search of his
Title:  equipments, there had been no fixed meeting between them.
Title:  They dined apart from one another, wherever they might
Title:  happen to be, or rather where they could.  Duty likewise on
Title:  its part took a portion of that precious time which was
Title:  gliding away so rapidly--only they had agreed to meet once a
Title:  week, about one o'clock, at the residence of Athos, seeing
Title:  that he, in agreement with the vow he had formed, did not
Title:  pass over the threshold of his door.
Title:  
Title:  This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kitty
Title:  came to find d'Artagnan.  Soon as Kitty left him, d'Artagnan
Title:  directed his steps toward the Rue Ferou.
Title:  
Title:  He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing.  Aramis had some
Title:  slight inclination to resume the cassock.  Athos, according
Title:  to his system, neither encouraged nor dissuaded him.  Athos
Title:  believed that everyone should be left to his own free will.
Title:  He never gave advice but when it was asked, and even then he
Title:  required to be asked twice.
Title:  
Title:  "People, in general," he said, "only ask advice not to
Title:  follow it; or if they do follow it, it is for the sake of
Title:  having someone to blame for having given it."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos arrived a minute after d'Artagnan.  The four friends
Title:  were reunited.
Title:  
Title:  The four countenances expressed four different feelings:
Title:  that of Porthos, tranquillity; that of d'Artagnan, hope;
Title:  that of Aramis, uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of a moment's conversation, in which Porthos
Title:  hinted that a lady of elevated rank had condescended to
Title:  relieve him from his embarrassment, Mousqueton entered.  He
Title:  came to request his master to return to his lodgings, where
Title:  his presence was urgent, as he piteously said.
Title:  
Title:  "Is it my equipment?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes and no," replied Mousqueton.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but can't you speak?"
Title:  
Title:  "Come, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton.
Title:  An instant after, Bazin made his appearance at the door.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you want with me, my friend?" said Aramis, with
Title:  that mildness of language which was observable in him every
Title:  time that his ideas were directed toward the Church.
Title:  
Title:  "A man wishes to see Monsieur at home," replied Bazin.
Title:  
Title:  "A man!  What man?"
Title:  
Title:  "A mendicant."
Title:  
Title:  "Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner."
Title:  
Title:  "This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends
Title:  that you will be very glad to see him."
Title:  
Title:  "Has he sent no particular message for me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes.  If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come," he said, "tell
Title:  him I am from Tours."
Title:  
Title:  "From Tours!" cried Aramis.  "A thousand pardons, gentlemen;
Title:  but no doubt this man brings me the news I expected." And
Title:  rising also, he went off at a quick pace.  There remained
Title:  Athos and d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I believe these fellows have managed their business.  What
Title:  do you think, d'Artagnan?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I know that Porthos was in a fair way," replied d'Artagnan;
Title:  "and as to Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never been
Title:  seriously uneasy on his account.  But you, my dear Athos--
Title:  you, who so generously distributed the Englishman's
Title:  pistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do you
Title:  mean to do?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy,
Title:  seeing that it is blessed bread to kill an Englishman; but
Title:  if I had pocketed his pistoles, they would have weighed me
Title:  down like a remorse.
Title:  
Title:  "Go to, my dear Athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas."
Title:  
Title:  "Let it pass. What do you think of Monsieur de Treville
Title:  telling me, when he did me the honor to call upon me
Title:  yesterday, that you associated with the suspected English,
Title:  whom the cardinal protects?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, I visit an Englishwoman--the one I named."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice,
Title:  which naturally you took care not to adopt."
Title:  
Title:  "I gave you my reasons."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; you look there for your outfit, I think you said."
Title:  
Title:  "Not at all.  I have acquired certain knowledge that that
Title:  woman was concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you court
Title:  another.  It is the longest road, but certainly the most
Title:  amusing."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but one
Title:  consideration restrained him.  Athos was a gentleman,
Title:  punctilious in points of honor; and there were in the plan
Title:  which our lover had devised for Milady, he was sure, certain
Title:  things that would not obtain the assent of this Puritan.  He
Title:  was therefore silent; and as Athos was the least inquisitive
Title:  of any man on earth, d'Artagnan's confidence stopped there.
Title:  We will therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing
Title:  important to say to each other, and follow Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to
Title:  him came from Tours, we have seen with what rapidity the
Title:  young man followed, or rather went before, Bazin; he ran
Title:  without stopping from the Rue Ferou to the Rue de Vaugirard.
Title:  On entering he found a man of short stature and intelligent
Title:  eyes, but covered with rags.
Title:  
Title:  "You have asked for me?" said the Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis.  Is that your name,
Title:  monsieur?"
Title:  
Title:  "My very own.  You have brought me something?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief."
Title:  
Title:  "Here it is," said Aramis, taking a small key from his
Title:  breast and opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of
Title:  pearl, "here it is.  Look."
Title:  
Title:  "That is right," replied the mendicant; "dismiss your lackey."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could
Title:  want with his master, kept pace with him as well as he
Title:  could, and arrived almost at the same time he did; but his
Title:  quickness was not of much use to him.  At the hint from the
Title:  mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he was
Title:  obliged to obey.
Title:  
Title:  Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in
Title:  order to be sure that nobody could either see or hear him,
Title:  and opening his ragged vest, badly held together by a
Title:  leather strap, he began to rip the upper part of his
Title:  doublet, from which he drew a letter.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed
Title:  the superscription with an almost religious respect, and
Title:  opened the epistle, which contained what follows:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still
Title:  for some time separated; but the delightful days of youth
Title:  are not lost beyond return.  Perform your duty in camp; I
Title:  will do mine elsewhere.  Accept that which the bearer brings
Title:  you; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman, and
Title:  think of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes.
Title:  
Title:  "Adieu; or rather, AU REVOIR."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew from
Title:  amid his rags a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles,
Title:  which he laid down on the table; then he opened the door,
Title:  bowed, and went out before the young man, stupefied by his
Title:  letter, had ventured to address a word to him.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a
Title:  postscript:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  P.S. You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count
Title:  and a grandee of Spain!
Title:  
Title:  "Golden dreams!" cried Aramis.  "Oh, beautiful life! Yes, we
Title:  are young; yes, we shall yet have happy days! My love, my
Title:  blood, my life! all, all, all, are thine, my adored
Title:  mistress!"
Title:  
Title:  And he kissed the letter with passion, without even
Title:  vouchsafing a look at the gold which sparkled on the table.
Title:  
Title:  Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer any
Title:  reason to exclude him, he bade him come in.
Title:  
Title:  Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot
Title:  that he came to announce d'Artagnan, who, curious to know
Title:  who the mendicant could be, came to Aramis on leaving Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Now, as d'Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing that
Title:  Bazin forgot to announce him, he announced himself.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil! my dear Aramis," said d'Artagnan, "if these are
Title:  the prunes that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you will
Title:  make my compliments to the gardener who gathers them."
Title:  
Title:  "You are mistaken, friend d'Artagnan," said Aramis, always
Title:  on his guard; "this is from my publisher, who has just sent
Title:  me the price of that poem in one-syllable verse which I
Title:  began yonder."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, indeed," said d'Artagnan.  "Well, your publisher is
Title:  very generous, my dear Aramis, that's all I can say."
Title:  
Title:  "How, monsieur?" cried Bazin, "a poem sell so dear as that!
Title:  It is incredible! Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you
Title:  like; you may become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and
Title:  Monsieur de Benserade.  I like that.  A poet is as good as
Title:  an abbe.  Ah! Monsieur Aramis, become a poet, I beg of you."
Title:  
Title:  "Bazin, my friend," said Aramis, "I believe you meddle with
Title:  my conversation."
Title:  
Title:  Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!" said d'Artagnan with a smile, "you sell your
Title:  productions at their weight in gold.  You are very
Title:  fortunate, my friend; but take care or you will lose that
Title:  letter which is peeping from your doublet, and which also
Title:  comes, no doubt, from your publisher."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, and
Title:  re-buttoned his doublet.
Title:  
Title:  "My dear d'Artagnan," said he, "if you please, we will join
Title:  our friends; as I am rich, we will today begin to dine
Title:  together again, expecting that you will be rich in your
Title:  turn."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith!" said d'Artagnan, with great pleasure.  "It is
Title:  long since we have had a good dinner; and I, for my part,
Title:  have a somewhat hazardous expedition for this evening, and
Title:  shall not be sorry, I confess, to fortify myself with a few
Title:  glasses of good old Burgundy."
Title:  
Title:  "Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection to
Title:  that," said Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold had
Title:  removed, as by magic, his ideas of conversion.
Title:  
Title:  And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket
Title:  to answer the needs of the moment, he placed the others in
Title:  the ebony box, inlaid with mother of pearl, in which was the
Title:  famous handkerchief which served him as a talisman.
Title:  
Title:  The two friends repaired to Athos's, and he, faithful to his
Title:  vow of not going out, took upon him to order dinner to be
Title:  brought to them.  As he was perfectly acquainted with the
Title:  details of gastronomy, d'Artagnan and Aramis made no
Title:  objection to abandoning this important care to him.
Title:  
Title:  They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bac
Title:  met Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving
Title:  before him a mule and a horse.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite
Title:  free from joy.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my yellow horse," cried he.  "Aramis, look at that
Title:  horse!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, the frightful brute!" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my dear," replied d'Artagnan, "upon that very horse I
Title:  came to Paris."
Title:  
Title:  "What, does Monsieur know this horse?" said Mousqueton.
Title:  
Title:  "It is of an original color," said Aramis; "I never saw one
Title:  with such a hide in my life."
Title:  
Title:  "I can well believe it," replied d'Artagnan, "and that was
Title:  why I got three crowns for him.  It must have been for his
Title:  hide, for, CERTES, the carcass is not worth eighteen livres.
Title:  But how did this horse come into your bands, Mousqueton?"
Title:  
Title:  "Pray," said the lackey, "say nothing about it, monsieur; it
Title:  is a frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!"
Title:  
Title:  "How is that, Mousqueton?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a
Title:  lady of quality, the Duchesse de--but, your pardon; my master
Title:  has commanded me to be discreet.  She had forced us to
Title:  accept a little souvenir, a magnificent Spanish GENET and an
Title:  Andalusian mule, which were beautiful to look upon.  The
Title:  husband heard of the affair; on their way he confiscated the
Title:  two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, and
Title:  substituted these horrible animals."
Title:  
Title:  "Which you are taking back to him?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly!" replied Mousqueton. "You may well believe that we
Title:  will not accept such steeds as these in exchange for those
Title:  which had been promised to us."
Title:  
Title:  "No, PARDIEU; though I should like to have seen Porthos on
Title:  my yellow horse.  That would give me an idea of how I looked
Title:  when I arrived in Paris.  But don't let us hinder you,
Title:  Mousqueton; go and perform your master's orders.  Is he at
Title:  home?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," said Mousqueton, "but in a very ill humor.
Title:  Get up!"
Title:  
Title:  He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins,
Title:  while the two friends went to ring at the bell of the
Title:  unfortunate Porthos.  He, having seen them crossing the
Title:  yard, took care not to answer, and they rang in vain.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the
Title:  Pont Neuf, still driving the two sorry animals before him,
Title:  he reached the Rue aux Ours.  Arrived there, he fastened,
Title:  according to the orders of his master, both horse and mule
Title:  to the knocker of the procurator's door; then, without
Title:  taking any thought for their future, he returned to Porthos,
Title:  and told him that his commission was completed.
Title:  
Title:  In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had not
Title:  eaten anything since the morning, made such a noise in
Title:  raising and letting fall the knocker that the procurator
Title:  ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in the neighborhood
Title:  to whom this horse and mule belonged.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Coquenard recognized her present, and could not at
Title:  first comprehend this restitution; but the visit of Porthos
Title:  soon enlightened her.  The anger which fired the eyes of the
Title:  Musketeer, in spite of his efforts to suppress it, terrified
Title:  his sensitive inamorata.  In fact, Mousqueton had not
Title:  concealed from his master that he had met d'Artagnan and
Title:  Aramis, and that d'Artagnan in the yellow horse had
Title:  recognized the Bearnese pony upon which he had come to
Title:  Paris, and which he had sold for three crowns.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the
Title:  procurator's wife in the cloister of St. Magloire.  The
Title:  procurator, seeing he was going, invited him to dinner--an
Title:  invitation which the Musketeer refused with a majestic air.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St.
Title:  Magloire, for she guessed the reproaches that awaited her
Title:  there; but she was fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fall
Title:  in the shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of
Title:  a woman Porthos let fall upon the bowed head of the
Title:  procurator's wife.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas," said she, "I did all for the best! One of our
Title:  clients is a horsedealer; he owes money to the office, and
Title:  is backward in his pay.  I took the mule and the horse for
Title:  what he owed us; he assured me that they were two noble
Title:  steeds."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, madame," said Porthos, "if he owed you more than five
Title:  crowns, your horsedealer is a thief."
Title:  
Title:  "There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur
Title:  Porthos," said the procurator's wife, seeking to excuse
Title:  herself.
Title:  
Title:  "No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy things
Title:  cheap ought to permit others to seek more generous friends."
Title:  And Porthos, turning on his heel, made a step to retire.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Porthos!  Monsieur Porthos!" cried the
Title:  procurator's wife.  "I have been wrong; I see it.  I ought
Title:  not to have driven a bargain when it was to equip a cavalier
Title:  like you."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step.  The
Title:  procurator's wife fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud,
Title:  all surrounded by duchesses and marchionesses, who cast bags
Title:  of money at his feet.
Title:  
Title:  "Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!" cried she.
Title:  "Stop, and let us talk."
Title:  
Title:  "Talking with you brings me misfortune," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "But, tell me, what do you ask?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I asked
Title:  you for something."
Title:  
Title:  The procurator's wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and in
Title:  the violence of her grief she cried out, "Monsieur Porthos,
Title:  I am ignorant of all such matters!  How should I know what a
Title:  horse is?  How should I know what horse furniture is?"
Title:  
Title:  "You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what
Title:  they are; but you wished to be frugal, and consequently to
Title:  lend at usury."
Title:  
Title:  "It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair that
Title:  wrong, upon my word of honor."
Title:  
Title:  "How so?" asked the Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen.  This evening M. Coquenard is going to the house of
Title:  the Due de Chaulnes, who has sent for him.  It is for a
Title:  consultation, which will last three hours at least.  Come!
Title:  We shall be alone, and can make up our accounts."
Title:  
Title:  "In good time.  Now you talk, my dear."
Title:  
Title:  "You pardon me?"
Title:  
Title:  "We shall see," said Porthos, majestically; and the two
Title:  separated saying, "Till this evening."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" thought Porthos, as he walked away, "it appears
Title:  I am getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard's strongbox at
Title:  last."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  35  A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID
Title:  
Title:  The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by
Title:  d'Artagnan at last arrived.
Title:  
Title:  As was his custom, d'Artagnan presented himself at Milady's
Title:  at about nine o'clock.  He found her in a charming humor.
Title:  Never had he been so well received.  Our Gascon knew, by the
Title:  first glance of his eye, that his billet had been delivered,
Title:  and that this billet had had its effect.
Title:  
Title:  Kitty entered to bring some sherbet.  Her mistress put on a
Title:  charming face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the
Title:  poor girl was so sad that she did not even notice Milady's
Title:  condescension.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and
Title:  was forced to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature
Title:  had made a mistake in their formation.  To the great lady
Title:  she had given a heart vile and venal; to the SOUBRETTE she
Title:  had given the heart of a duchess.
Title:  
Title:  At ten o'clock Milady began to appear restless.  D'Artagnan
Title:  knew what she wanted.  She looked at the clock, rose,
Title:  reseated herself, smiled at d'Artagnan with an air which
Title:  said, "You are very amiable, no doubt, but you would be
Title:  charming if you would only depart."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand
Title:  to kiss.  The young man felt her press his hand, and
Title:  comprehended that this was a sentiment, not of coquetry, but
Title:  of gratitude because of his departure.
Title:  
Title:  "She loves him devilishly," he murmured.  Then he went out.
Title:  
Title:  This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the
Title:  antechamber, nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great
Title:  door.  It was necessary that d'Artagnan should find alone
Title:  the staircase and the little chamber.  She heard him enter,
Title:  but she did not raise her head.  The young man went to her
Title:  and took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.
Title:  
Title:  As d'Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady
Title:  in a delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by
Title:  way of recompense for the manner in which she had this time
Title:  executed the commission, she had given Kitty a purse.
Title:  
Title:  Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a
Title:  corner, where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold
Title:  pieces on the carpet.  The poor girl, under the caresses of
Title:  d'Artagnan, lifted her head.  D'Artagnan himself was
Title:  frightened by the change in her countenance.  She joined her
Title:  hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a
Title:  word.  As little sensitive as was the heart of d'Artagnan,
Title:  he was touched by this mute sorrow; but he held too
Title:  tenaciously to his projects, above all to this one, to
Title:  change the program which he had laid out in advance.  He did
Title:  not therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch; only
Title:  he represented his action as one of simple vengeance.
Title:  
Title:  For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady,
Title:  doubtless to conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered
Title:  Kitty to extinguish all the lights in the apartment, and
Title:  even in the little chamber itself.  Before daybreak M. de
Title:  Wardes must take his departure, still in obscurity.
Title:  
Title:  Presently they heard Milady retire to her room.  D'Artagnan
Title:  slipped into the wardrobe.  Hardly was he concealed when the
Title:  little bell sounded.  Kitty went to her mistress, and did
Title:  not leave the door open; but the partition was so thin that
Title:  one could hear nearly all that passed between the two women.
Title:  
Title:  Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the
Title:  smallest details of the pretended interview of the soubrette
Title:  with de Wardes when he received the letter; how he had
Title:  responded; what was the expression of his face; if he seemed
Title:  very amorous.  And to all these questions poor Kitty, forced
Title:  to put on a pleasant face, responded in a stifled voice
Title:  whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark,
Title:  solely because happiness is egotistical.
Title:  
Title:  Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count
Title:  approached, Milady had everything about her darkened, and
Title:  ordered Kitty to return to her own chamber, and introduce de
Title:  Wardes whenever he presented himself.
Title:  
Title:  Kitty's detention was not long.  Hardly had d'Artagnan seen,
Title:  through a crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment
Title:  was in obscurity, than he slipped out of his concealment, at
Title:  the very moment when Kitty reclosed the door of communication.
Title:  
Title:  "What is that noise?" demanded Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "It is I," said d'Artagnan in a subdued voice, "I, the Comte
Title:  de Wardes."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God!" murmured Kitty, "he has not even
Title:  waited for the hour he himself named!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Milady, in a trembling voice, "why do you not
Title:  enter?  Count, Count," added she, "you know that I wait for
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  At this appeal d'Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and
Title:  slipped into the chamber.
Title:  
Title:  If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover
Title:  receives under a name which is not his own protestations of
Title:  love addressed to his happy rival.  D'Artagnan was in a
Title:  dolorous situation which he had not foreseen. Jealousy
Title:  gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much as poor
Title:  Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next
Title:  chamber.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, Count," said Milady, in her softest voice, and
Title:  pressing his hand in her own, "I am happy in the love which
Title:  your looks and your words have expressed to me every time we
Title:  have met.  I also--I love you.  Oh, tomorrow, tomorrow, I
Title:  must have some pledge from you which will prove that you
Title:  think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!" and
Title:  she slipped a ring from her finger onto d'Artagnan's.
Title:  d'Artagnan remembered having seen this ring on the finger of
Title:  Milady; it was a magnificent sapphire, encircled with
Title:  brilliants.
Title:  
Title:  The first movement of d'Artagnan was to return it, but
Title:  Milady added, "No, no! Keep that ring for love of me.
Title:  Besides, in accepting it," she added, in a voice full of
Title:  emotion, "you render me a much greater service than you
Title:  imagine."
Title:  
Title:  "This woman is full of mysteries," murmured d'Artagnan to
Title:  himself.  At that instant he felt himself ready to reveal
Title:  all.  He even opened his mouth to tell Milady who he was,
Title:  and with what a revengeful purpose he had come; but she
Title:  added, "Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon barely
Title:  failed to kill."
Title:  
Title:  The monster was himself.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh," continued Milady, "do your wounds still make you
Title:  suffer?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, much," said d'Artagnan, who did not well know how to
Title:  answer.
Title:  
Title:  "Be tranquil," murmured Milady; "I will avenge you--and
Title:  cruelly!"
Title:  
Title:  "PESTE!" said d'Artagnan to himself, "the moment for
Title:  confidences has not yet come."
Title:  
Title:  It took some time for d'Artagnan to resume this little
Title:  dialogue; but then all the ideas of vengeance which he had
Title:  brought with him had completely vanished.  This woman
Title:  exercised over him an unaccountable power; he hated and
Title:  adored her at the same time.  He would not have believed
Title:  that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same
Title:  heart, and by their union constitute a passion so strange,
Title:  and as it were, diabolical.
Title:  
Title:  Presently it sounded one o'clock.  It was necessary to
Title:  separate.  D'Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt
Title:  only the liveliest regret at the parting; and as they
Title:  addressed each other in a reciprocally passionate adieu,
Title:  another interview was arranged for the following week.
Title:  
Title:  Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to d'Artagnan when he
Title:  passed through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted
Title:  him through the darkness, and only quit him at the
Title:  staircase.
Title:  
Title:  The next morning d'Artagnan ran to find Athos.  He was
Title:  engaged in an adventure so singular that he wished for
Title:  counsel.  He therefore told him all.
Title:  
Title:  "Your Milady," said he, "appears to be an infamous creature,
Title:  but not the less you have done wrong to deceive her.  In one
Title:  fashion or another you have a terrible enemy on your hands."
Title:  
Title:  While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the
Title:  sapphire set with diamonds which had taken, on d'Artagnan's
Title:  finger, the place of the queen's ring, carefully kept in a
Title:  casket.
Title:  
Title:  "You notice my ring?" said the Gascon, proud to display so
Title:  rich a gift in the eyes of his friends.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Athos, "it reminds me of a family jewel."
Title:  
Title:  "It is beautiful, is it not?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Athos, "magnificent.  I did not think two
Title:  sapphires of such a fine water existed.  Have you traded it
Title:  for your diamond?"
Title:  
Title:  "No.  It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather
Title:  Frenchwoman--for I am convinced she was born in France,
Title:  though I have not questioned her."
Title:  
Title:  "That ring comes from Milady?" cried Athos, with a voice in
Title:  which it was easy to detect strong emotion.
Title:  
Title:  "Her very self; she gave it me last night.  Here it is,"
Title:  replied d'Artagnan, taking it from his finger.
Title:  
Title:  Athos examined it and became very pale.  He tried it on his
Title:  left hand; it fit his finger as if made for it.
Title:  
Title:  A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually
Title:  calm brow of this gentleman.
Title:  
Title:  "It is impossible it can be she," said be.  "How could this
Title:  ring come into the hands of Milady Clarik?  And yet it is
Title:  difficult to suppose such a resemblance should exist between
Title:  two jewels."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know this ring?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I thought I did," replied Athos; "but no doubt I was
Title:  mistaken."  And he returned d'Artagnan the ring without,
Title:  however, ceasing to look at it.
Title:  
Title:  "Pray, d'Artagnan," said Athos, after a minute, "either take
Title:  off that ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such
Title:  cruel recollections that I shall have no head to converse
Title:  with you.  Don't ask me for counsel; don't tell me you are
Title:  perplexed what to do.  But stop! let me look at that
Title:  sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its
Title:  faces scratched by accident."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Athos started.  "Look," said he, "is it not strange?" and he
Title:  pointed out to d'Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.
Title:  
Title:  "But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "From my mother, who inherited it from her mother.  As I
Title:  told you, it is an old family jewel."
Title:  
Title:  "And you--sold it?" asked d'Artagnan, hesitatingly.
Title:  
Title:  "No," replied Athos, with a singular smile.  "I gave it away
Title:  in a night of love, as it has been given to you."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if
Title:  there were abysses in Milady's soul whose depths were dark
Title:  and unknown.  He took back the ring, but put it in his
Title:  pocket and not on his finger.
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan," said Athos, taking his hand, "you know I love
Title:  you; if I had a son I could not love him better.  Take my
Title:  advice, renounce this woman.  I do not know her, but a sort
Title:  of intuition tells me she is a lost creature, and that there
Title:  is something fatal about her."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right," said d'Artagnan; "I will have done with
Title:  her.  I own that this woman terrifies me."
Title:  
Title:  "Shall you have the courage?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I shall," replied d'Artagnan, "and instantly."
Title:  
Title:  "In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly," said the
Title:  gentleman, pressing the Gascon's hand with an affection
Title:  almost paternal; "and God grant that this woman, who has
Title:  scarcely entered into your life, may not leave a terrible
Title:  trace in it!" And Athos bowed to d'Artagnan like a man who
Title:  wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left
Title:  alone with his thoughts.
Title:  
Title:  On reaching home d'Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him.  A
Title:  month of fever could not have changed her more than this one
Title:  night of sleeplessness and sorrow.
Title:  
Title:  She was sent by her mistress to the false de Wardes.  Her
Title:  mistress was mad with love, intoxicated with joy.  She
Title:  wished to know when her lover would meet her a second night;
Title:  and poor Kitty, pale and trembling, awaited d'Artagnan's
Title:  reply.  The counsels of his friend, joined to the cries of
Title:  his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved
Title:  and his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again.  As a
Title:  reply, he wrote the following letter:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting.  Since
Title:  my convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my
Title:  hands that I am forced to regulate them a little.  When your
Title:  turn comes, I shall have the honor to inform you of it.  I
Title:  kiss your hands.
Title:  
Title:  Comte de Wardes
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Not a word about the sapphire.  Was the Gascon determined to
Title:  keep it as a weapon against Milady, or else, let us be
Title:  frank, did he not reserve the sapphire as a last resource
Title:  for his outfit?  It would be wrong to judge the actions of
Title:  one period from the point of view of another.  That which
Title:  would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at
Title:  that time quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger
Title:  sons of the best families were frequently supported by their
Title:  mistresses.  D'Artagnan gave the open letter to Kitty, who
Title:  at first was unable to comprehend it, but who became almost
Title:  wild with joy on reading it a second time.  She could
Title:  scarcely believe in her happiness; and d'Artagnan was forced
Title:  to renew with the living voice the assurances which he had
Title:  written.  And whatever might be--considering the violent
Title:  character of Milady--the danger which the poor girl incurred
Title:  in giving this billet to her mistress, she ran back to the
Title:  Place Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.
Title:  
Title:  The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows
Title:  of a rival.
Title:  
Title:  Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty's in
Title:  bringing it; but at the first words she read she became
Title:  livid.  She crushed the paper in her hand, and turning with
Title:  flashing eyes upon Kitty, she cried, "What is this letter?"
Title:  
Title:  "The answer to Madame's," replied Kitty, all in a tremble.
Title:  
Title:  "Impossible!" cried Milady.  "It is impossible a gentleman
Title:  could have written such a letter to a woman." Then all at
Title:  once, starting, she cried, "My God! can he have--" and she
Title:  stopped. She ground her teeth; she was of the color of
Title:  ashes.  She tried to go toward the window for air, but she
Title:  could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, and
Title:  she sank into an armchair.  Kitty, fearing she was ill,
Title:  hastened toward her and was beginning to open her dress; but
Title:  Milady started up, pushing her away.  "What do you want with
Title:  me?" said she, "and why do you place your hand on me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her
Title:  help," responded the maid, frightened at the terrible
Title:  expression which had come over her mistress's face.
Title:  
Title:  "I faint?  I? I? Do you take me for half a woman?  When I am
Title:  insulted I do not faint; I avenge myself!"
Title:  
Title:  And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  36  DREAM OF VENGEANCE
Title:  
Title:  That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d'Artagnan came
Title:  as usual, he should be immediately admitted; but he did not
Title:  come.
Title:  
Title:  The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and
Title:  related to him all that had passed on the preceding evening.
Title:  d'Artagnan smiled; this jealous anger of Milady was his
Title:  revenge.
Title:  
Title:  That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the
Title:  preceding evening.  She renewed the order relative to the
Title:  Gascon; but as before she expected him in vain.
Title:  
Title:  The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at
Title:  d'Artagnan's, she was no longer joyous and alert as on the
Title:  two preceding days; but on the contrary sad as death.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her;
Title:  but she, as her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket
Title:  and gave it to him.
Title:  
Title:  This letter was in Milady's handwriting; only this time it
Title:  was addressed to M. d'Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.
Title:  
Title:  He opened it and read as follows:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Dear M. d'Artagnan, It is wrong thus to neglect your
Title:  friends, particularly at the moment you are about to leave
Title:  them for so long a time.  My brother-in-law and myself
Title:  expected you yesterday and the day before, but in vain.
Title:  Will it be the same this evening?
Title:  
Title:  Your very grateful,
Title:  Milady Clarik
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "That's all very simple," said d'Artagnan; "I expected this
Title:  letter. My credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte de
Title:  Wardes."
Title:  
Title:  "And will you go?" asked Kitty.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen to me, my dear girl," said the Gascon, who sought
Title:  for an excuse in his own eyes for breaking the promise he
Title:  had made Athos; "you must understand it would be impolitic
Title:  not to accept such a positive invitation.  Milady, not
Title:  seeing me come again, would not be able to understand what
Title:  could cause the interruption of my visits, and might suspect
Title:  something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a
Title:  woman would go?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!" said Kitty, "you know how to represent things
Title:  in such a way that you are always in the right.  You are
Title:  going now to pay your court to her again, and if this time
Title:  you succeed in pleasing her in your own name and with your
Title:  own face, it will be much worse than before."
Title:  
Title:  Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen.
Title:  d'Artagnan reassured her as well as he could, and promised
Title:  to remain insensible to the seductions of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be
Title:  more grateful for her kindnesses than he was, and that he
Title:  would be obedient to her orders.  He did not dare to write
Title:  for fear of not being able--to such experienced eyes as those
Title:  of Milady--to disguise his writing sufficiently.
Title:  
Title:  As nine o'clock sounded, d'Artagnan was at the Place Royale.
Title:  It was evident that the servants who waited in the
Title:  antechamber were warned, for as soon as d'Artagnan appeared,
Title:  before even he had asked if Milady were visible, one of them
Title:  ran to announce him.
Title:  
Title:  "Show him in," said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing
Title:  that d'Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.
Title:  
Title:  He was introduced.
Title:  
Title:  "I am at home to nobody," said Milady; "observe, to nobody."
Title:  The servant went out.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady.  She was
Title:  pale, and looked fatigued, either from tears or want of
Title:  sleep.  The number of lights had been intentionally
Title:  diminished, but the young woman could not conceal the traces
Title:  of the fever which had devoured her for two days.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry.  She
Title:  then made an extraordinary effort to receive him, but never
Title:  did a more distressed countenance give the lie to a more
Title:  amiable smile.
Title:  
Title:  To the questions which d'Artagnan put concerning her health,
Title:  she replied, "Bad, very bad."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," replied he, "my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt,
Title:  stand in need of repose, and I will withdraw."
Title:  
Title:  "No. no!" said Milady.  "On the contrary, stay, Monsieur
Title:  d'Artagnan; your agreeable company will divert me."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, oh!" thought d'Artagnan.  "She has never been so kind
Title:  before.  On guard!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and
Title:  conversed with more than her usual brilliancy.  At the same
Title:  time the fever, which for an instant abandoned her, returned
Title:  to give luster to her eyes, color to her cheeks, and
Title:  vermillion to her lips.  D'Artagnan was again in the
Title:  presence of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her
Title:  enchantments.  His love, which he believed to be extinct but
Title:  which was only asleep, awoke again in his heart.  Milady
Title:  smiled, and d'Artagnan felt that he could damn himself for
Title:  that smile.  There was a moment at which he felt something
Title:  like remorse.
Title:  
Title:  By degrees, Milady became more communicative.  She asked
Title:  d'Artagnan if he had a mistress.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas!" said d'Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he
Title:  could assume, "can you be cruel enough to put such a
Title:  question to me--to me, who, from the moment I saw you, have
Title:  only breathed and sighed through you and for you?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady smiled with a strange smile.
Title:  
Title:  "Then you love me?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Have I any need to tell you so?  Have you not perceived
Title:  it?"
Title:  
Title:  "It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the
Title:  capture, the more difficult they are to be won."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, difficulties do not affright me," said d'Artagnan.  "I
Title:  shrink before nothing but impossibilities."
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing is impossible," replied Milady, "to true love."
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing, madame?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing," replied Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" thought d'Artagnan.  "The note is changed.  Is
Title:  she going to fall in love with me, by chance, this fair
Title:  inconstant; and will she be disposed to give me myself
Title:  another sapphire like that which she gave me for de Wardes?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady's.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, now," she said, "let us see what you would do to
Title:  prove this love of which you speak."
Title:  
Title:  "All that could be required of me.  Order; I am ready."
Title:  
Title:  "For everything?"
Title:  
Title:  "For everything," cried d'Artagnan, who knew beforehand that
Title:  he had not much to risk in engaging himself thus.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, now let us talk a little seriously," said Milady, in
Title:  her turn drawing her armchair nearer to d'Artagnan's chair.
Title:  
Title:  "I am all attention, madame," said he.
Title:  
Title:  Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then,
Title:  as if appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, "I
Title:  have an enemy."
Title:  
Title:  "You, madame!" said d'Artagnan, affecting surprise; "is
Title:  that possible, my God?--good and beautiful as you are!"
Title:  
Title:  "A mortal enemy."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  "An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him
Title:  and me it is war to the death.  May I reckon on you as an
Title:  auxiliary?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive
Title:  creature wished to reach.
Title:  
Title:  "You may, madame," said he, with emphasis.  "My arm and my
Title:  life belong to you, like my love."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said Milady, "since you are as generous as you are
Title:  loving--"
Title:  
Title:  She stopped.
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" demanded d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," replied Milady, after a moment of silence, "from the
Title:  present time, cease to talk of impossibilities."
Title:  
Title:  "Do not overwhelm me with happiness," cried d'Artagnan,
Title:  throwing himself on his knees, and covering with kisses the
Title:  hands abandoned to him.
Title:  
Title:  "Avenge me of that infamous de Wardes," said Milady, between
Title:  her teeth, "and I shall soon know how to get rid of you--you
Title:  double idiot, you animated sword blade!"
Title:  
Title:  "Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerous
Title:  woman," said d'Artagnan, likewise to himself, "after having
Title:  abused me with such effrontery, and afterward I will laugh
Title:  at you with him whom you wish me to kill."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan lifted up his head.
Title:  
Title:  "I am ready," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan,"
Title:  said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "I could interpret one of your looks."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you would employ for me your arm which has already
Title:  acquired so much renown?"
Title:  
Title:  "Instantly!"
Title:  
Title:  "But on my part," said Milady, "how should I repay such a
Title:  service?  I know these lovers.  They are men who do nothing
Title:  for nothing."
Title:  
Title:  "You know the only reply that I desire," said d'Artagnan,
Title:  "the only one worthy of you and of me!"
Title:  
Title:  And he drew nearer to her.
Title:  
Title:  She scarcely resisted.
Title:  
Title:  "Interested man!" cried she, smiling.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," cried d'Artagnan, really carried away by the passion
Title:  this woman had the power to kindle in his heart, "ah, that
Title:  is because my happiness appears so impossible to me; and I
Title:  have such fear that it should fly away from me like a dream
Title:  that I pant to make a reality of it."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!"
Title:  
Title:  "I am at your orders," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Quite certain?" said Milady, with a last doubt.
Title:  
Title:  "Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into
Title:  your beautiful eyes!"
Title:  
Title:  "Who told you that I had been weeping?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "It appeared to me--"
Title:  
Title:  "Such women as I never weep," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "So much the better! Come, tell me his name!"
Title:  
Title:  "Remember that his name is all my secret."
Title:  
Title:  "Yet I must know his name."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!"
Title:  
Title:  "You overwhelm me with joy.  What is his name?"
Title:  
Title:  "You know him."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "It is surely not one of my friends?" replied d'Artagnan,
Title:  affecting hesitation in order to make her believe him
Title:  ignorant.
Title:  
Title:  "If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?"
Title:  cried Milady; and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.
Title:  
Title:  "Not if it were my own brother!" cried d'Artagnan, as if
Title:  carried away by his enthusiasm.
Title:  
Title:  Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that
Title:  was meant.
Title:  
Title:  "I love your devotedness," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, do you love nothing else in me?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I love you also, YOU!" said she, taking his hand.
Title:  
Title:  The warm pressure made d'Artagnan tremble, as if by the
Title:  touch that fever which consumed Milady attacked himself.
Title:  
Title:  "You love me, you!" cried he.  "Oh, if that were so, I should
Title:  lose my reason!"
Title:  
Title:  And he folded her in his arms.  She made no effort to remove
Title:  her lips from his kisses; only she did not respond to them.
Title:  Her lips were cold; it appeared to d'Artagnan that he had
Title:  embraced a statue.
Title:  
Title:  He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by
Title:  love.  He almost believed in the tenderness of Milady; he
Title:  almost believed in the crime of de Wardes.  If de Wardes had
Title:  at that moment been under his hand, he would have killed
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  Milady seized the occasion.
Title:  
Title:  "His name is--" said she, in her turn.
Title:  
Title:  "De Wardes; I know it," cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "And how do you know it?" asked Milady, seizing both his
Title:  hands, and endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom
Title:  of his heart.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away,
Title:  and that he had committed an error.
Title:  
Title:  "Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say," repeated Milady, "how do
Title:  you know it?"
Title:  
Title:  "How do I know it?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon
Title:  where I was, showed a ring which he said he had received
Title:  from you."
Title:  
Title:  "Wretch!" cried Milady.
Title:  
Title:  The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the
Title:  very bottom of d'Artagnan's heart.
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" continued she.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I will avenge you of this wretch," replied
Title:  d'Artagnan, giving himself the airs of Don Japhet of
Title:  Armenia.
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, my brave friend!" cried Milady; "and when shall I
Title:  be avenged?"
Title:  
Title:  "Tomorrow--immediately--when you please!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady was about to cry out, "Immediately," but she
Title:  reflected that such precipitation would not be very gracious
Title:  toward d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand
Title:  counsels to give to her defender, in order that he might
Title:  avoid explanations with the count before witnesses.  All
Title:  this was answered by an expression of d'Artagnan's.
Title:  "Tomorrow," said he, "you will be avenged, or I shall be
Title:  dead."
Title:  
Title:  "No," said she, "you will avenge me; but you will not be
Title:  dead.  He is a coward."
Title:  
Title:  "With women, perhaps; but not with men.  I know something of
Title:  him."
Title:  
Title:  "But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your
Title:  fortune in your contest with him."
Title:  
Title:  "Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn
Title:  her back tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  "Which means that you now hesitate?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, I do not hesitate; God forbid!  But would it be just to
Title:  allow me to go to a possible death without having given me
Title:  at least something more than hope?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady answered by a glance which said, "Is that all?--speak,
Title:  then." And then accompanying the glance with explanatory
Title:  words, "That is but too just," said she, tenderly.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you are an angel!" exclaimed the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Then all is agreed?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Except that which I ask of you, dear love."
Title:  
Title:  "But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?"
Title:  
Title:  "I cannot wait till tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!  I hear my brother.  It will be useless for him to
Title:  find you here."
Title:  
Title:  She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.
Title:  
Title:  "Go out this way," said she, opening a small private door,
Title:  "and come back at eleven o'clock; we will then terminate
Title:  this conversation.  Kitty will conduct you to my chamber."
Title:  
Title:  The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing
Title:  there like a statue?  Do as I bid you: show the chevalier
Title:  out; and this evening at eleven o'clock--you have heard what
Title:  I said."
Title:  
Title:  "It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven
Title:  o'clock," thought d'Artagnan; "that's a settled custom."
Title:  
Title:  Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.
Title:  
Title:  "But," said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from
Title:  the reproaches of Kitty, "I must not play the fool.  This
Title:  woman is certainly a great liar.  I must take care."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  37  MILADY'S SECRET
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to
Title:  Kitty's chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do--and
Title:  that for two reasons: the first, because by this means he
Title:  should escape reproaches, recriminations, and prayers; the
Title:  second, because he was not sorry to have an opportunity of
Title:  reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if possible, to
Title:  fathom those of this woman.
Title:  
Title:  What was most clear in the matter was that d'Artagnan loved
Title:  Milady like a madman, and that she did not love him at all.
Title:  In an instant d'Artagnan perceived that the best way in
Title:  which he could act would be to go home and write Milady a
Title:  long letter, in which he would confess to her that he and de
Title:  Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same,
Title:  and that consequently he could not undertake, without
Title:  committing suicide, to kill the Comte de Wardes.  But he
Title:  also was spurred on by a ferocious desire of vengeance.  He
Title:  wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and as this
Title:  vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it,
Title:  he could not make up his mind to renounce it.
Title:  
Title:  He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning
Title:  at every ten steps to look at the light in Milady's
Title:  apartment, which was to be seen through the blinds.  It was
Title:  evident that this time the young woman was not in such haste
Title:  to retire to her apartment as she had been the first.
Title:  
Title:  At length the light disappeared.  With this light was
Title:  extinguished the last irresolution in the heart of
Title:  d'Artagnan.  He recalled to his mind the details of the
Title:  first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on fire he
Title:  re-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty's chamber.
Title:  
Title:  The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs,
Title:  wished to delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the
Title:  watch, had heard the noise d'Artagnan had made, and opening
Title:  the door, said, "Come in."
Title:  
Title:  All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous
Title:  effrontery, that d'Artagnan could scarcely believe what he
Title:  saw or what he heard.  He imagined himself to be drawn into
Title:  one of those fantastic intrigues one meets in dreams.  He,
Title:  however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady, yielding
Title:  to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises
Title:  over iron.
Title:  
Title:  As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it.
Title:  Jealousy, fury, offended pride, all the passions in short
Title:  that dispute the heart of an outraged woman in love, urged
Title:  her to make a revelation; but she reflected that she would
Title:  be totally lost if she confessed having assisted in such a
Title:  machination, and above all, that d'Artagnan would also be
Title:  lost to her forever.  This last thought of love counseled
Title:  her to make this last sacrifice.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his
Title:  wishes.  It was no longer a rival who was beloved; it was
Title:  himself who was apparently beloved.  A secret voice
Title:  whispered to him, at the bottom of his heart, that he was
Title:  but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressed
Title:  till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but
Title:  madness silenced this voice and stifled its murmurs.  And
Title:  then our Gascon, with that large quantity of conceit which
Title:  we know he possessed, compared himself with de Wardes, and
Title:  asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for
Title:  himself?
Title:  
Title:  He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment.
Title:  Milady was no longer for him that woman of fatal intentions
Title:  who had for a moment terrified him; she was an ardent,
Title:  passionate mistress, abandoning herself to love which she
Title:  also seemed to feel.  Two hours thus glided away.  When the
Title:  transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who had
Title:  not the same motives for forgetfulness that d'Artagnan had,
Title:  was the first to return to reality, and asked the young man
Title:  if the means which were on the morrow to bring on the
Title:  encounter between him and de Wardes were already arranged in
Title:  his mind.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course,
Title:  forgot himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it
Title:  was too late to think about duels and sword thrusts.
Title:  
Title:  This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her
Title:  mind terrified Milady, whose questions became more pressing.
Title:  
Title:  Then d'Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this
Title:  impossible duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he
Title:  could not succeed.  Milady kept him within the limits she
Title:  had traced beforehand with her irresistible spirit and her
Title:  iron will.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady
Title:  to renounce, by pardoning de Wardes, the furious projects
Title:  she had formed.
Title:  
Title:  But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed
Title:  in a sharp, bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the
Title:  darkness, "Are you afraid, dear Monsieur d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "You cannot think so, dear love!" replied d'Artagnan; "but
Title:  now, suppose this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty than
Title:  you think him?"
Title:  
Title:  "At all events," said Milady, seriously, "he has deceived
Title:  me, and from the moment he deceived me, he merited death."
Title:  
Title:  "He shall die, then, since you condemn him!" said
Title:  d'Artagnan, in so firm a tone that it appeared to Milady an
Title:  undoubted proof of devotion.  This reassured her.
Title:  
Title:  We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but
Title:  d'Artagnan believed it to be hardly two hours before the
Title:  daylight peeped through the window blinds, and invaded the
Title:  chamber with its paleness.  Seeing d'Artagnan about to leave
Title:  her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her on the Comte
Title:  de Wardes.
Title:  
Title:  "I am quite ready," said d'Artagnan; "but in the first place
Title:  I should like to be certain of one thing."
Title:  
Title:  "And what is that?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "That is, whether you really love me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have given you proof of that, it seems to me."
Title:  
Title:  "And I am yours, body and soul!"
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my
Title:  love, you must, in your turn, satisfy me of yours.  Is it
Title:  not so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say," replied
Title:  d'Artagnan, "do you not entertain a little fear on my
Title:  account?"
Title:  
Title:  "What have I to fear?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, that I may be dangerously wounded--killed even."
Title:  
Title:  "Impossible!" cried Milady, "you are such a valiant man, and
Title:  such an expert swordsman."
Title:  
Title:  "You would not, then, prefer a method," resumed d'Artagnan,
Title:  "which would equally avenge you while rendering the combat
Title:  useless?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady looked at her lover in silence.  The pale light of
Title:  the first rays of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely
Title:  frightful expression.
Title:  
Title:  "Really," said she, "I believe you now begin to hesitate."
Title:  
Title:  "No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de
Title:  Wardes, since you have ceased to love him.  I think that a
Title:  man must be so severely punished by the loss of your love
Title:  that he stands in need of no other chastisement."
Title:  
Title:  "Who told you that I loved him?" asked Milady, sharply.
Title:  
Title:  "At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much
Title:  fatuity, that you love another," said the young man, in a
Title:  caressing tone, "and I repeat that I am really interested
Title:  for the count."
Title:  
Title:  "You?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I."
Title:  
Title:  "And why YOU?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because I alone know--"
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty
Title:  toward you as he appears."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!" said Milady, in an anxious tone; "explain
Title:  yourself, for I really cannot tell what you mean."
Title:  
Title:  And she looked at d'Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly,
Title:  with eyes which seemed to burn themselves away.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; I am a man of honor," said d'Artagnan, determined to
Title:  come to an end, "and since your love is mine, and I am
Title:  satisfied I possess it--for I do possess it, do I not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Entirely; go on."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I feel as if transformed--a confession weighs on my
Title:  mind."
Title:  
Title:  "A confession!"
Title:  
Title:  "If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it,
Title:  but you love me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt."
Title:  
Title:  "Then if through excess of love I have rendered myself
Title:  culpable toward you, you will pardon me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips
Title:  to Milady's, but she evaded him.
Title:  
Title:  "This confession," said she, growing paler, "what is this
Title:  confession?"
Title:  
Title:  "You gave de Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very
Title:  room, did you not?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, no! It is not true," said Milady, in a tone of voice so
Title:  firm, and with a countenance so unchanged, that if
Title:  d'Artagnan had not been in such perfect possession of the
Title:  fact, he would have doubted.
Title:  
Title:  "Do not lie, my angel," said d'Artagnan, smiling; "that
Title:  would be useless."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean?  Speak! you kill me."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have
Title:  already pardoned you."
Title:  
Title:  "What next? what next?"
Title:  
Title:  "De Wardes cannot boast of anything."
Title:  
Title:  "How is that?  You told me yourself that that ring--"
Title:  
Title:  "That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the
Title:  d'Artagnan of today are the same person."
Title:  
Title:  The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with
Title:  shame--a slight storm which would resolve itself into tears;
Title:  but he was strangely deceived, and his error was not of long
Title:  duration.
Title:  
Title:  Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed d'Artagnan's attempted
Title:  embrace by a violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of
Title:  bed.
Title:  
Title:  It was almost broad daylight.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India
Title:  linen, to implore her pardon; but she, with a strong
Title:  movement, tried to escape.  Then the cambric was torn from
Title:  her beautiful shoulders; and on one of those lovely
Title:  shoulders, round and white, d'Artagnan recognized, with
Title:  inexpressible astonishment, the FLEUR-DE-LIS--that indelible
Title:  mark which the hand of the infamous executioner had
Title:  imprinted.
Title:  
Title:  "Great God!" cried d'Artagnan, loosing his hold of her
Title:  dress, and remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.
Title:  
Title:  But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror.  He
Title:  had doubtless seen all.  The young man now knew her secret,
Title:  her terrible secret--the secret she concealed even from her
Title:  maid with such care, the secret of which all the world was
Title:  ignorant, except himself.
Title:  
Title:  She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, but
Title:  like a wounded panther.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, wretch!" cried she, "you have basely betrayed me, and
Title:  still more, you have my secret!  You shall die."
Title:  
Title:  And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the
Title:  dressing table, opened it with a feverish and trembling
Title:  band, drew from it a small poniard, with a golden haft and a
Title:  sharp thin blade, and then threw herself with a bound upon
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was
Title:  terrified at that wild countenance, those terribly dilated
Title:  pupils, those pale cheeks, and those bleeding lips.  He
Title:  recoiled to the other side of the room as he would have done
Title:  from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his sword
Title:  coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost
Title:  unconsciously from the scabbard.  But without taking any
Title:  heed of the sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to
Title:  him to stab him, and did not stop till she felt the sharp
Title:  point at her throat.
Title:  
Title:  She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but
Title:  d'Artagnan kept it free from her grasp, and presenting the
Title:  point, sometimes at her eyes, sometimes at her breast,
Title:  compelled her to glide behind the bedstead, while he aimed
Title:  at making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty's
Title:  apartment.
Title:  
Title:  Milady during this time continued to strike at him with
Title:  horrible fury, screaming in a formidable way.
Title:  
Title:  As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel,
Title:  d'Artagnan began to recover himself little by little.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, beautiful lady, very well," said he; "but, PARDIEU,
Title:  if you don't calm yourself, I will design a second
Title:  FLEUR-DE-LIS upon one of those pretty cheeks!"
Title:  
Title:  "Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!" howled Milady.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to
Title:  Kitty's door.  At the noise they made, she in overturning
Title:  the furniture in her efforts to get at him, he in screening
Title:  himself behind the furniture to keep out of her reach, Kitty
Title:  opened the door.  D'Artagnan, who had unceasingly maneuvered
Title:  to gain this point, was not at more than three paces from
Title:  it.  With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into
Title:  that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the
Title:  door, and placed all his weight against it, while Kitty
Title:  pushed the bolts.
Title:  
Title:  Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a
Title:  strength apparently above that of a woman; but finding she
Title:  could not accomplish this, she in her fury stabbed at the
Title:  door with her poniard, the point of which repeatedly
Title:  glittered through the wood. Every blow was accompanied with
Title:  terrible imprecations.
Title:  
Title:  "Quick, Kitty, quick!" said d'Artagnan, in a low voice, as
Title:  soon as the bolts were fast, "let me get out of the hotel;
Title:  for if we leave her time to turn round, she will have me
Title:  killed by the servants."
Title:  
Title:  "But you can't go out so," said Kitty; "you are naked."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said d'Artagnan, then first thinking of the
Title:  costume he found himself in, "that's true.  But dress me as
Title:  well as you are able, only make haste; think, my dear girl,
Title:  it's life and death!"
Title:  
Title:  Kitty was but too well aware of that.  In a turn of the hand
Title:  she muffled him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a
Title:  cloak.  She gave him some slippers, in which he placed his
Title:  naked feet, and then conducted him down the stairs.  It was
Title:  time.  Milady had already rung her bell, and roused the
Title:  whole hotel.  The porter was drawing the cord at the moment
Title:  Milady cried from her window, "Don't open!"
Title:  
Title:  The young man fled while she was still threatening him with
Title:  an impotent gesture.  The moment she lost sight of him,
Title:  Milady tumbled fainting into her chamber.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  38  HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMODING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking
Title:  any heed of what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed
Title:  across half Paris, and did not stop till he came to Athos's
Title:  door.  The confusion of his mind, the terror which spurred
Title:  him on, the cries of some of the patrol who started in
Title:  pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
Title:  notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work,
Title:  only made him precipitate his course.
Title:  
Title:  He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos's
Title:  apartment, and knocked at the door enough to break it down.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this
Title:  noisy summons, and d'Artagnan sprang with such violence into
Title:  the room as nearly to overturn the astonished lackey.
Title:  
Title:  In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time
Title:  found his speech.
Title:  
Title:  "Holloa, there!" cried he; "what do you want, you strumpet?
Title:  What's your business here, you hussy?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from
Title:  the folds of the cloak.  At sight of the mustaches and the
Title:  naked sword, the poor devil perceived he had to deal with a
Title:  man.  He then concluded it must be an assassin.
Title:  
Title:  "Help! murder! help!" cried he.
Title:  
Title:  "Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!" said the young man; "I am
Title:  d'Artagnan; don't you know me?  Where is your master?"
Title:  
Title:  "You, Monsieur d'Artagnan!" cried Grimaud, "impossible."
Title:  
Title:  "Grimaud," said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a
Title:  dressing gown, "Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting
Title:  yourself to speak?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur, it is--"
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!"
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud contented himself with pointing d'Artagnan out to
Title:  his master with his finger.
Title:  
Title:  Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he
Title:  burst into a laugh which was quite excused by the strange
Title:  masquerade before his eyes--petticoats falling over his
Title:  shoes, sleeves tucked up, and mustaches stiff with
Title:  agitation.
Title:  
Title:  "Don't laugh, my friend!" cried d'Artagnan; "for heaven's
Title:  sake, don't laugh, for upon my soul, it's no laughing
Title:  matter!"
Title:  
Title:  And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and
Title:  with such a real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly
Title:  seized his hand, crying, "Are you wounded, my friend?  How
Title:  pale you are!"
Title:  
Title:  "No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure!  Are you
Title:  alone, Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "PARBLEU! whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, well!" and d'Artagnan rushed into Athos's chamber.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, speak!" said the latter, closing the door and bolting
Title:  it, that they might not be disturbed.  "Is the king dead?
Title:  Have you killed the cardinal?  You are quite upset!  Come,
Title:  come, tell me; I am dying with curiosity and uneasiness!"
Title:  
Title:  "Athos," said d'Artagnan, getting rid of his female
Title:  garments, and appearing in his shirt, "prepare yourself to
Title:  hear an incredible, an unheard-of story."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but put on this dressing gown first," said the
Title:  Musketeer to his friend.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking
Title:  one sleeve for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," replied d'Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos's
Title:  ear, and lowering his voice, "Milady is marked with a
Title:  FLEUR-DE-LIS upon her shoulder!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!" cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in
Title:  his heart.
Title:  
Title:  "Let us see," said d'Artagnan.  "Are you SURE that the OTHER
Title:  is dead?"
Title:  
Title:  "THE OTHER?" said Athos, in so stifled a voice that
Title:  d'Artagnan scarcely heard him.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens."
Title:  
Title:  Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.
Title:  
Title:  "This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years."
Title:  
Title:  "Fair," said Athos, "is she not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Very."
Title:  
Title:  "Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black
Title:  eyelids and eyebrows?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Tall, well-made?  She has lost a tooth, next to the
Title:  eyetooth on the left?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as if
Title:  efforts had been made to efface it by the application of
Title:  poultices?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "But you say she is English?"
Title:  
Title:  "She is called Milady, but she may be French.  Lord de
Title:  Winter is only her brother-in-law,"
Title:  
Title:  "I will see her, d'Artagnan!"
Title:  
Title:  "Beware, Athos, beware.  You tried to kill her; she is a
Title:  woman to return you the like, and not to fail."
Title:  
Title:  "She will not dare to say anything; that would be to
Title:  denounce herself."
Title:  
Title:  "She is capable of anything or everything.  Did you ever see
Title:  her furious?"
Title:  
Title:  "No," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly
Title:  afraid I have drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady and
Title:  her menaces of death.
Title:  
Title:  "You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a
Title:  hair," said Athos.  "Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we
Title:  leave Paris.  We are going according to all probability to
Title:  La Rochelle, and once gone--"
Title:  
Title:  "She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she
Title:  recognizes you.  Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me
Title:  alone!"
Title:  
Title:  "My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?"
Title:  said Athos.  "Do you, perchance, think I set any great store
Title:  by life?"
Title:  
Title:  "There is something horribly mysterious under all this,
Title:  Athos; this woman is one of the cardinal's spies, I am sure
Title:  of that."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you
Title:  in high admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a
Title:  great hatred for you; but as, considering everything, he
Title:  cannot accuse you openly, and as hatred must be satisfied,
Title:  particularly when it's a cardinal's hatred, take care of
Title:  yourself.  If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat,
Title:  use every precaution.  Mistrust everything, in short, even
Title:  your own shadow."
Title:  
Title:  "Fortunately," said d'Artagnan, "all this will be only
Title:  necessary till after tomorrow evening, for when once with
Title:  the army, we shall have, I hope, only men to dread."
Title:  
Title:  "In the meantime," said Athos, "I renounce my plan of
Title:  seclusion, and wherever you go, I will go with you.  You
Title:  must return to the Rue des Fossoyeurs; I will accompany
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "But however near it may be," replied d'Artagnan, "I cannot
Title:  go thither in this guise."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said Athos, and he rang the bell.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud entered.
Title:  
Title:  Athos made him a sign to go to d'Artagnan's residence, and
Title:  bring back some clothes.  Grimaud replied by another sign
Title:  that he understood perfectly, and set off.
Title:  
Title:  "All this will not advance your outfit," said Athos; "for if
Title:  I am not mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel
Title:  with Milady, and she will certainly not have the politeness
Title:  to return it to you.  Fortunately, you have the sapphire."
Title:  
Title:  "The jewel is yours, my dear Athos!  Did you not tell me it
Title:  was a family jewel?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he
Title:  once told me.  It formed part of the nuptial present he made
Title:  his wife, and it is magnificent.  My mother gave it to me,
Title:  and I, fool as I was, instead of keeping the ring as a holy
Title:  relic, gave it to this wretch."
Title:  
Title:  "Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you
Title:  attach much value."
Title:  
Title:  "I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands
Title:  of that infamous creature?  Never; that ring is defiled,
Title:  d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "Sell it, then."
Title:  
Title:  "Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should
Title:  consider it a profanation."
Title:  
Title:  "Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns
Title:  on it.  With that sum you can extricate yourself from your
Title:  present difficulties; and when you are full of money again,
Title:  you can redeem it, and take it back cleansed from its
Title:  ancient stains, as it will have passed through the hands of
Title:  usurers."
Title:  
Title:  Athos smiled.
Title:  
Title:  "You are a capital companion, d'Artagnan," said be; "your
Title:  never-failing cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction.
Title:  Well, let us pledge the ring, but upon one condition."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five
Title:  hundred crowns for me."
Title:  
Title:  "Don't dream it, Athos.  I don't need the quarter of such a
Title:  sum--I who am still only in the Guards--and by selling my
Title:  saddles, I shall procure it.  What do I want?  A horse for
Title:  Planchet, that's all.  Besides, you forget that I have a
Title:  ring likewise."
Title:  
Title:  "To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to
Title:  mine; at least, I have thought so."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only
Title:  extricate us from some great embarrassment, but even a great
Title:  danger.  It is not only a valuable diamond, but it is an
Title:  enchanted talisman."
Title:  
Title:  "I don't at all understand you, but I believe all you say to
Title:  be true.  Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours.  You
Title:  shall take half the sum that will be advanced upon it, or I
Title:  will throw it into the Seine; and I doubt, as was the case
Title:  with Polycrates, whether any fish will be sufficiently
Title:  complaisant to bring it back to us."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I will take it, then," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet;
Title:  the latter, anxious about his master and curious to know
Title:  what had happened to him, had taken advantage of the
Title:  opportunity and brought the garments himself.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  d'Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same.  When
Title:  the two were ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the
Title:  sign of a man taking aim, and the lackey immediately took
Title:  down his musketoon, and prepared to follow his master.
Title:  
Title:  They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs.
Title:  Bonacieux was standing at the door, and looked at d'Artagnan
Title:  hatefully.
Title:  
Title:  "Make haste, dear lodger," said he; "there is a very pretty
Title:  girl waiting for you upstairs; and you know women don't like
Title:  to be kept waiting."
Title:  
Title:  "That's Kitty!" said d'Artagnan to himself, and darted into
Title:  the passage.
Title:  
Title:  Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and
Title:  crouching against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a
Title:  tremble.  As soon as she perceived him, she cried, "You have
Title:  promised your protection; you have promised to save me from
Title:  her anger.  Remember, it is you who have ruined me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty," said d'Artagnan; "be at ease,
Title:  my girl.  But what happened after my departure?"
Title:  
Title:  "How can I tell!" said Kitty.  "The lackeys were brought by
Title:  the cries she made.  She was mad with passion.  There exist
Title:  no imprecations she did not pour out against you.  Then I
Title:  thought she would remember it was through my chamber you had
Title:  penetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I was your
Title:  accomplice; so I took what little money I had and the best
Title:  of my things, and I got away.
Title:  
Title:  "Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you?  I am going
Title:  away the day after tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  "Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier.  Help me out of
Title:  Paris; help me out of France!"
Title:  
Title:  "I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle,"
Title:  aid d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some
Title:  lady of your acquaintance--in your own country, for
Title:  instance."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear little love!  In my country the ladies do without
Title:  chambermaids.  But stop!  I can manage your business for
Title:  you.  Planchet, go and find Aramis.  Request him to come
Title:  here directly.  We have something very important to say to
Title:  him."
Title:  
Title:  "I understand," said Athos; "but why not Porthos?  I should
Title:  have thought that his duchess--"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, Porthos's duchess is dressed by her husband's clerks,"
Title:  said d'Artagnan, laughing.  "Besides, Kitty would not like
Title:  to live in the Rue aux Ours.  Isn't it so, Kitty?"
Title:  
Title:  "I do not care where I live," said Kitty, "provided I am
Title:  well concealed, and nobody knows where I am."
Title:  
Title:  "Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you
Title:  are no longer jealous of me--"
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near," said Kitty, "I shall
Title:  always love you."
Title:  
Title:  "Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?" murmured
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "And I, also," said d'Artagnan, "I also.  I shall always
Title:  love you; be sure of that.  But now answer me.  I attach
Title:  great importance to the question I am about to put to you.
Title:  Did you never hear talk of a young woman who was carried off
Title:  one night?"
Title:  
Title:  "There, now!  Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman
Title:  still?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--Monsieur
Title:  Athos, this gentleman here."
Title:  
Title:  "I?" cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who
Title:  perceives he is about to tread upon an adder.
Title:  
Title:  "You, to be sure!" said d'Artagnan, pressing Athos's hand.
Title:  "You know the interest we both take in this poor little
Title:  Madame Bonacieux.  Besides, Kitty will tell nothing; will
Title:  you, Kitty?  You understand, my dear girl," continued
Title:  d'Artagnan, "she is the wife of that frightful baboon you
Title:  saw at the door as you came in."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!  You remind me of my fright!  If he should have
Title:  known me again!"
Title:  
Title:  "How? know you again?  Did you ever see that man before?"
Title:  
Title:  "He came twice to Milady's."
Title:  
Title:  "That's it.  About what time?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago."
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly so."
Title:  
Title:  "And yesterday evening he came again."
Title:  
Title:  "Yesterday evening?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, just before you came."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies.  And
Title:  do you believe he knew you again, Kitty?"
Title:  
Title:  "I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it
Title:  was too late."
Title:  
Title:  "Go down, Athos--he mistrusts you less than me--and see if he
Title:  be still at his door."
Title:  
Title:  Athos went down and returned immediately.
Title:  
Title:  "He has gone," said he, "and the house door is shut."
Title:  
Title:  "He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the
Title:  pigeons are at this moment in the dovecot."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, let us all fly," said Athos, "and leave nobody
Title:  here but Planchet to bring us news."
Title:  
Title:  "A minute.  Aramis, whom we have sent for!"
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said Athos; "we must wait for Aramis."
Title:  
Title:  At that moment Aramis entered.
Title:  
Title:  The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave
Title:  him to understand that among all his high connections he
Title:  must find a place for Kitty.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring,
Title:  "Will it be really rendering you a service, d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "I shall be grateful to you all my life."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well.  Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her
Title:  friends who resides in the provinces, I believe, for a
Title:  trustworthy maid.  If you can, my dear d'Artagnan, answer
Title:  for Mademoiselle-"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted
Title:  to the person who will give me the means of quitting Paris."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said Aramis, "this falls out very well."
Title:  
Title:  He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which
Title:  he sealed with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.
Title:  
Title:  "And now, my dear girl," said d'Artagnan, "you know that it
Title:  is not good for any of us to be here.  Therefore let us
Title:  separate.  We shall meet again in better days."
Title:  
Title:  "And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may
Title:  be," said Kitty, "you will find me loving you as I love you
Title:  today."
Title:  
Title:  "Dicers' oaths!" said Athos, while d'Artagnan went to
Title:  conduct Kitty downstairs.
Title:  
Title:  An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing
Title:  to meet again at four o'clock with Athos, and leaving
Title:  Planchet to guard the house.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis returned home, and Athos and d'Artagnan busied
Title:  themselves about pledging the sapphire.
Title:  
Title:  As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three
Title:  hundred pistoles on the ring.  Still further, the Jew told
Title:  them that if they would sell it to him, as it would make a
Title:  magnificent pendant for earrings, he would give five hundred
Title:  pistoles for it.
Title:  
Title:  Athos and d'Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and
Title:  the knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three
Title:  hours to purchase the entire equipment of the Musketeer.
Title:  Besides, Athos was very easy, and a noble to his fingers'
Title:  ends.  When a thing suited him he paid the price demanded,
Title:  without thinking to ask for any abatement.  D'Artagnan would
Title:  have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his
Title:  shoulder, with a smile, and d'Artagnan understood that it
Title:  was all very well for such a little Gascon gentleman as
Title:  himself to drive a bargain, but not for a man who had the
Title:  bearing of a prince.  The Musketeer met with a superb
Title:  Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean
Title:  and elegant, rising six years.  He examined him, and found
Title:  him sound and without blemish.  They asked a thousand livres
Title:  for him.
Title:  
Title:  He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while
Title:  d'Artagnan was discussing the price with the dealer, Athos
Title:  was counting out the money on the table.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost three
Title:  hundred livres.
Title:  
Title:  But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased,
Title:  Athos had not a sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles.
Title:  d'Artagnan offered his friend a part of his share which he
Title:  should return when convenient.
Title:  
Title:  But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his
Title:  shoulders.
Title:  
Title:  "How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if
Title:  be purchased it?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Five hundred pistoles."
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, two hundred more--a hundred pistoles for you
Title:  and a hundred pistoles for me.  Well, now, that would be a
Title:  real fortune to us, my friend; let us go back to the Jew's
Title:  again."
Title:  
Title:  "What!  will you--"
Title:  
Title:  "This ring would certainly only recall very bitter
Title:  remembrances; then we shall never be masters of three
Title:  hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that we really should lose
Title:  two hundred pistoles by the bargain.  Go and tell him the
Title:  ring is his, d'Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred
Title:  pistoles with you."
Title:  
Title:  "Reflect, Athos!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must
Title:  learn how to make sacrifices.  Go, d'Artagnan, go; Grimaud
Title:  will accompany you with his musketoon."
Title:  
Title:  A half hour afterward, d'Artagnan returned with the two
Title:  thousand livres, and without having met with any accident.
Title:  
Title:  It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not
Title:  expect.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  39  A VISION
Title:  
Title:  At four o'clock the four friends were all assembled with
Title:  Athos.  Their anxiety about their outfits had all
Title:  disappeared, and each countenance only preserved the
Title:  expression of its own secret disquiet--for behind all present
Title:  happiness is concealed a fear for the future.
Title:  
Title:  Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters for
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a pretty
Title:  seal in green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a
Title:  green branch.
Title:  
Title:  The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with the
Title:  terrible arms of his Eminence the cardinal duke.
Title:  
Title:  At the sight of the little letter the heart of d'Artagnan
Title:  bounded, for he believed he recognized the handwriting, and
Title:  although he had seen that writing but once, the memory of it
Title:  remained at the bottom of his heart.
Title:  
Title:  He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened it
Title:  eagerly.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Be," said the letter, "on Thursday next, at from six to
Title:  seven o'clock in the evening, on the road to Chaillot, and
Title:  look carefully into the carriages that pass; but if you have
Title:  any consideration for your own life or that of those who
Title:  love you, do not speak a single word, do not make a movement
Title:  which may lead anyone to believe you have recognized her who
Title:  exposes herself to everything for the sake of seeing you but
Title:  for an instant."
Title:  
Title:  No signature.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "That's a snare," said Athos; "don't go, d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet," replied d'Artagnan, "I think I recognize the
Title:  writing."
Title:  
Title:  "It may be counterfeit," said Athos.  "Between six and seven
Title:  o'clock the road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might as
Title:  well go and ride in the forest of Bondy."
Title:  
Title:  "But suppose we all go," said d'Artagnan; "what the devil!
Title:  They won't devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms,
Title:  and all!"
Title:  
Title:  "And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our new
Title:  equipments," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "But if it is a woman who writes," said Aramis, "and that
Title:  woman desires not to be seen, remember, you compromise her,
Title:  d'Artagnan; which is not the part of a gentleman."
Title:  
Title:  "We will remain in the background," said Porthos, "and he
Title:  will advance alone."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriage
Title:  which goes at a gallop."
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!" said d'Artagnan, "they will miss me; if they fire we
Title:  will ride after the carriage, and exterminate those who may
Title:  be in it.  They must be enemies."
Title:  
Title:  "He is right," said Porthos; "battle.  Besides, we must try
Title:  our own arms."
Title:  
Title:  "Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure," said Aramis, with his
Title:  mild and careless manner.
Title:  
Title:  "As you please," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "it is half past four, and we
Title:  have scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six."
Title:  
Title:  "Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us," said
Title:  Porthos, "and that will be a pity.  Let us get ready,
Title:  gentlemen."
Title:  
Title:  "But this second letter," said Athos, "you forget that; it
Title:  appears to me, however, that the seal denotes that it
Title:  deserves to be opened.  For my part, I declare, d'Artagnan,
Title:  I think it of much more consequence than the little piece of
Title:  waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your bosom."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan blushed.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said he, "let us see, gentlemen, what are his
Title:  Eminence's commands," and d'Artagnan unsealed the letter and
Title:  read,
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "M. d'Artagnan, of the king's Guards, company Dessessart, is
Title:  expected at the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eight
Title:  o'clock.
Title:  
Title:  "La Houdiniere, CAPTAIN OF THE GUARDS"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" said Athos; "here's a rendezvous much more
Title:  serious than the other."
Title:  
Title:  "I will go to the second after attending the first," said
Title:  d'Artagnan.  "One is for seven o'clock, and the other for
Title:  eight; there will be time for both."
Title:  
Title:  "Hum!  I would not go at all," said Aramis.  "A gallant
Title:  knight cannot decline a rendezvous with a lady; but a
Title:  prudent gentleman may excuse himself from not waiting on his
Title:  Eminence, particularly when he has reason to believe he is
Title:  not invited to make his compliments."
Title:  
Title:  "I am of Aramis's opinion," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," replied d'Artagnan, "I have already received by
Title:  Monsieur de Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence.
Title:  I neglected it, and on the morrow a serious misfortune
Title:  happened to me--Constance disappeared.  Whatever may ensue, I
Title:  will go."
Title:  
Title:  "If you are determined," said Athos, "do so."
Title:  
Title:  "But the Bastille?" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Bah! you will get me out if they put me there," said
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "To be sure we will," replied Aramis and Porthos, with
Title:  admirable promptness and decision, as if that were the
Title:  simplest thing in the world, "to be sure we will get you
Title:  out; but meantime, as we are to set off the day after
Title:  tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this
Title:  Bastille."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us do better than that," said Athos; "do not let us
Title:  leave him during the whole evening.  Let each of us wait at
Title:  a gate of the palace with three Musketeers behind him; if we
Title:  see a close carriage, at all suspicious in appearance, come
Title:  out, let us fall upon it. It is a long time since we have
Title:  had a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal;
Title:  Monsieur de Treville must think us dead."
Title:  
Title:  "To a certainty, Athos," said Aramis, "you were meant to be
Title:  a general of the army!  What do you think of the plan,
Title:  gentlemen?"
Title:  
Title:  "Admirable!" replied the young men in chorus.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Porthos, "I will run to the hotel, and engage
Title:  our comrades to hold themselves in readiness by eight
Title:  o'clock; the rendezvous, the Place du Palais-Cardinal.
Title:  Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the horses."
Title:  
Title:  "I have no horse," said d'Artagnan; "but that is of no
Title:  consequence, I can take one of Monsieur de Treville's."
Title:  
Title:  "That is not worth while," said Aramis, "you can have one of
Title:  mine."
Title:  
Title:  "One of yours! how many have you, then?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Three," replied Aramis, smiling.
Title:  
Title:  "Certes," cried Athos, "you are the best-mounted poet of
Title:  France or Navarre."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, my dear Aramis, you don't want three horses?  I
Title:  cannot comprehend what induced you to buy three!"
Title:  
Title:  "Therefore I only purchased two," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, the third was brought to me this very morning by a
Title:  groom out of livery, who would not tell me in whose service
Title:  he was, and who said he had received orders from his
Title:  master."
Title:  
Title:  "Or his mistress," interrupted d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "That makes no difference," said Aramis, coloring; "and who
Title:  affirmed, as I said, that he had received orders from his
Title:  master or mistress to place the horse in my stable, without
Title:  informing me whence it came."
Title:  
Title:  "It is only to poets that such things happen," said Athos,
Title:  gravely.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, in that case, we can manage famously," said
Title:  d'Artagnan; "which of the two horses will you ride--that
Title:  which you bought or the one that was given to you?"
Title:  
Title:  "That which was given to me, assuredly.  You cannot for a
Title:  moment imagine, d'Artagnan, that I would commit such an
Title:  offense toward--"
Title:  
Title:  "The unknown giver," interrupted d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Or the mysterious benefactress," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "The one you bought will then become useless to you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nearly so."
Title:  
Title:  "And you selected it yourself?"
Title:  
Title:  "With the greatest care.  The safety of the horseman, you
Title:  know, depends almost always upon the goodness of his horse."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, transfer it to me at the price it cost you?"
Title:  
Title:  "I was going to make you the offer, my dear d'Artagnan,
Title:  giving you all the time necessary for repaying me such a
Title:  trifle."
Title:  
Title:  "How much did it cost you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Eight hundred livres."
Title:  
Title:  "Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend," said
Title:  d'Artagnan, taking the sum from his pocket; "I know that is
Title:  the coin in which you were paid for your poems."
Title:  
Title:  "You are rich, then?" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Rich?  Richest, my dear fellow!"
Title:  
Title:  And d'Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his
Title:  pocket.
Title:  
Title:  "Send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the Musketeers, and
Title:  your horse can be brought back with ours."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well; but it is already five o'clock, so make haste."
Title:  
Title:  A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end
Title:  of the Rue Ferou on a very handsome genet.  Mousqueton
Title:  followed him upon an Auvergne horse, small but very
Title:  handsome.  Porthos was resplendent with joy and pride.
Title:  
Title:  At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the other
Title:  end of the street upon a superb English charger.  Bazin
Title:  followed him upon a roan, holding by the halter a vigorous
Title:  Mecklenburg horse; this was d'Artagnan mount.
Title:  
Title:  The two Musketeers met at the gate.  Athos and d'Artagnan
Title:  watched their approach from the window.
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" cried Aramis, "you have a magnificent horse
Title:  there, Porthos."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," replied Porthos, "it is the one that ought to have
Title:  been sent to me at first.  A bad joke of the husband's
Title:  substituted the other; but the husband has been punished
Title:  since, and I have obtained full satisfaction."
Title:  
Title:  Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their
Title:  masters' steeds.  D'Artagnan and Athos put themselves into
Title:  saddle with their companions, and all four set forward;
Title:  Athos upon a horse he owed to a woman, Aramis on a horse he
Title:  owed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he owed to his
Title:  procurator's wife, and d'Artagnan on a horse he owed to his
Title:  good fortune--the best mistress possible.
Title:  
Title:  The lackeys followed.
Title:  
Title:  As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good
Title:  effect; and if Mme.  Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what
Title:  a superb appearance he made upon his handsome Spanish genet,
Title:  she would not have regretted the bleeding she had inflicted
Title:  upon the strongbox of her husband.
Title:  
Title:  Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Treville,
Title:  who was returning from St. Germain; he stopped them to offer
Title:  his compliments upon their appointments, which in an instant
Title:  drew round them a hundred gapers.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. de
Title:  Treville of the letter with the great red seal and the
Title:  cardinal's arms.  It is well understood that he did not
Title:  breathe a word about the other.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville approved of the resolution he had adopted,
Title:  and assured him that if on the morrow he did not appear, he
Title:  himself would undertake to find him, let him be where he
Title:  might.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; the
Title:  four friends pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. de
Title:  Treville.
Title:  
Title:  A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the day
Title:  began to decline, carriages were passing and repassing.
Title:  d'Artagnan, keeping at some distance from his friends,
Title:  darted a scrutinizing glance into every carriage that
Title:  appeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.
Title:  
Title:  At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as
Title:  twilight was beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared,
Title:  coming at a quick pace on the road of Sevres.  A
Title:  presentiment instantly told d'Artagnan that this carriage
Title:  contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; the
Title:  young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so
Title:  violently.  Almost instantly a female head was put out at
Title:  the window, with two fingers placed upon her mouth, either
Title:  to enjoin silence or to send him a kiss.  D'Artagnan uttered
Title:  a slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather this apparition--
Title:  for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision--was
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction
Title:  given, d'Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a few
Title:  strides overtook the carriage; but the window was
Title:  hermetically closed, the vision had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan then remembered the injunction: "If you value
Title:  your own life or that of those who love you, remain
Title:  motionless, and as if you had seen nothing."
Title:  
Title:  He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the
Title:  poor woman who had evidently exposed herself to great danger
Title:  by appointing this rendezvous.
Title:  
Title:  The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace,
Title:  till it dashed into Paris, and disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and not
Title:  knowing what to think.  If it was Mme.  Bonacieux and if she
Title:  was returning to Paris, why this fugitive rendezvous, why
Title:  this simple exchange of a glance, why this lost kiss?  If,
Title:  on the other side, it was not she--which was still quite
Title:  possible--for the little light that remained rendered a
Title:  mistake easy--might it not be the commencement of some plot
Title:  against him through the allurement of this woman, for whom
Title:  his love was known?
Title:  
Title:  His three companions joined him.  All had plainly seen a
Title:  woman's head appear at the window, but none of them, except
Title:  Athos, knew Mme.  Bonacieux.  The opinion of Athos was that
Title:  it was indeed she; but less preoccupied by that pretty face
Title:  than d'Artagnan, he had fancied he saw a second head, a
Title:  man's head, inside the carriage.
Title:  
Title:  "If that be the case," said d'Artagnan, "they are doubtless
Title:  transporting her from one prison to another.  But what can
Title:  they intend to do with the poor creature, and how shall I
Title:  ever meet her again?"
Title:  
Title:  "Friend," said Athos, gravely, "remember that it is the dead
Title:  alone with whom we are not likely to meet again on this
Title:  earth.  You know something of that, as well as I do, I
Title:  think.  Now, if your mistress is not dead, if it is she we
Title:  have just seen, you will meet with her again some day or
Title:  other.  And perhaps, my God!" added he, with that
Title:  misanthropic tone which was peculiar to him, "perhaps sooner
Title:  than you wish."
Title:  
Title:  Half past seven had sounded.  The carriage had been twenty
Title:  minutes behind the time appointed.  D'Artagnan's friends
Title:  reminded him that he had a visit to pay, but at the same
Title:  time bade him observe that there was yet time to retract.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious.
Title:  He had made up his mind that he would go to the Palais-
Title:  Cardinal, and that he would learn what his Eminence had to
Title:  say to him.  Nothing could turn him from his purpose.
Title:  
Title:  They reached the Rue St. Honore, and in the Place du Palais-
Title:  Cardinal they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walking
Title:  about in expectation of their comrades.  There only they
Title:  explained to them the matter in hand.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the
Title:  king's Musketeers, in which it was known he would one day
Title:  take his place; he was considered beforehand as a comrade.
Title:  It resulted from these antecedents that everyone entered
Title:  heartily into the purpose for which they met; besides, it
Title:  would not be unlikely that they would have an opportunity of
Title:  playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn, and
Title:  for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always
Title:  ready.
Title:  
Title:  Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command of
Title:  one, gave the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos;
Title:  and then each group went and took their watch near an
Title:  entrance.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principal
Title:  gate.
Title:  
Title:  Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was
Title:  not without a little uneasiness as he ascended the great
Title:  staircase, step by step.  His conduct toward Milady bore a
Title:  strong resemblance to treachery, and he was very suspicious
Title:  of the political relations which existed between that woman
Title:  and the cardinal.  Still further, de Wardes, whom he had
Title:  treated so ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; and
Title:  d'Artagnan knew that while his Eminence was terrible to his
Title:  enemies, he was strongly attached to his friends.
Title:  
Title:  "If de Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal,
Title:  which is not to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as
Title:  is probable, I may consider myself almost as a condemned
Title:  man," said d'Artagnan, shaking his head.  "But why has he
Title:  waited till now?  That's all plain enough.  Milady has laid
Title:  her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which
Title:  renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made
Title:  the cup overflow."
Title:  
Title:  "Fortunately," added he, "my good friends are down yonder,
Title:  and they will not allow me to be carried away without a
Title:  struggle.  Nevertheless, Monsieur de Treville's company of
Title:  Musketeers alone cannot maintain a war against the cardinal,
Title:  who disposes of the forces of all France, and before whom
Title:  the queen is without power and the king without will.
Title:  d'Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you
Title:  have excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!"
Title:  
Title:  He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the
Title:  antechamber.  He placed his letter in the hands of the usher
Title:  on duty, who led him into the waiting room and passed on
Title:  into the interior of the palace.
Title:  
Title:  In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinals
Title:  Guards, who recognized d'Artagnan, and knowing that it was
Title:  he who had wounded Jussac, they looked upon him with a smile
Title:  of singular meaning.
Title:  
Title:  This smile appeared to d'Artagnan to be of bad augury.
Title:  Only, as our Gascon was not easily intimidated--or rather,
Title:  thanks to a great pride natural to the men of his country,
Title:  he did not allow one easily to see what was passing in his
Title:  mind when that which was passing at all resembled fear--he
Title:  placed himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the Guards,
Title:  and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by no
Title:  means deficient in majesty.
Title:  
Title:  The usher returned and made a sign to d'Artagnan to follow
Title:  him.  It appeared to the young man that the Guards, on
Title:  seeing him depart, chuckled among themselves.
Title:  
Title:  He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a
Title:  library, and found himself in the presence of a man seated
Title:  at a desk and writing.
Title:  
Title:  The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking a
Title:  word.  D'Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with some
Title:  judge examining his papers; but he perceived that the man at
Title:  the desk wrote, or rather corrected, lines of unequal
Title:  length, scanning the words on his fingers.  He saw then that
Title:  he was with a poet.  At the end of an instant the poet
Title:  closed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written
Title:  "Mirame, a Tragedy in Five Acts," and raised his head.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan recognized the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  40  A TERRIBLE VISION
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheek
Title:  upon his hand, and looked intently at the young man for a
Title:  moment.  No one had a more searching eye than the Cardinal
Title:  de Richelieu, and d'Artagnan felt this glance run through
Title:  his veins like a fever.
Title:  
Title:  He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in his
Title:  hand and awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, without
Title:  too much assurance, but also without too much humility.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said the cardinal, "are you a d'Artagnan from
Title:  Bearn?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur," replied the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "There are several branches of the d'Artagnans at Tarbes and
Title:  in its environs," said the cardinal; "to which do you
Title:  belong?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars under
Title:  the great King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty."
Title:  
Title:  "That is well.  It is you who set out seven or eight months
Title:  ago from your country to seek your fortune in the capital?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "You came through Meung, where something befell you.  I
Title:  don't very well know what, but still something."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," said d'Artagnan, "this was what happened to
Title:  me--"
Title:  
Title:  "Never mind, never mind!" resumed the cardinal, with a smile
Title:  which indicated that he knew the story as well as he who
Title:  wished to relate it.  "You were recommended to Monsieur de
Title:  Treville, were you not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at
Title:  Meung--"
Title:  
Title:  "The letter was lost," replied his Eminence; "yes, I know
Title:  that.  But Monsieur de Treville is a skilled physiognomist,
Title:  who knows men at first sight; and he placed you in the
Title:  company of his brother-in-law, Monsieur Dessessart, leaving
Title:  you to hope that one day or other you should enter the
Title:  Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur is correctly informed," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Since that time many things have happened to you.  You were
Title:  walking one day behind the Chartreux, when it would have
Title:  been better if you had been elsewhere.  Then you took with
Title:  your friends a journey to the waters of Forges; they stopped
Title:  on the road, but you continued yours.  That is all very
Title:  simple: you had business in England."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," said d'Artagnan, quite confused, "I went--"
Title:  
Title:  "Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere--that concerns nobody.  I
Title:  know, because it is my office to know everything.  On your
Title:  return you were received by an august personage, and I
Title:  perceive with pleasure that you preserve the souvenir she
Title:  gave you."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen's diamond, which
Title:  he wore, and quickly turned the stone inward; but it was too
Title:  late.
Title:  
Title:  "The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois,"
Title:  resumed the cardinal.  "He went to desire you to come to the
Title:  palace.  You have not returned that visit, and you were
Title:  wrong."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with your
Title:  Eminence."
Title:  
Title:  "How could that be, monsieur?  Could you incur my
Title:  displeasure by having followed the orders of your superiors
Title:  with more intelligence and courage than another would have
Title:  done?  It is the people who do not obey that I punish, and
Title:  not those who, like you, obey--but too well.  As a proof,
Title:  remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to
Title:  come to me, and seek in your memory for what happened to you
Title:  that very night."
Title:  
Title:  That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux took place.  D'Artagnan trembled; and he likewise
Title:  recollected that during the past half hour the poor woman
Title:  had passed close to him, without doubt carried away by the
Title:  same power that had caused her disappearance.
Title:  
Title:  "In short," continued the cardinal, "as I have heard nothing
Title:  of you for some time past, I wished to know what you were
Title:  doing.  Besides, you owe me some thanks.  You must yourself
Title:  have remarked how much you have been considered in all the
Title:  circumstances."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan bowed with respect.
Title:  
Title:  "That," continued the cardinal, "arose not only from a
Title:  feeling of natural equity, but likewise from a plan I have
Title:  marked out with respect to you."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan became more and more astonished.
Title:  
Title:  "I wished to explain this plan to you on the day you
Title:  received my first invitation; but you did not come.
Title:  Fortunately, nothing is lost by this delay, and you are now
Title:  about to hear it.  Sit down there, before me, d'Artagnan;
Title:  you are gentleman enough not to listen standing."  And the
Title:  cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young
Title:  man, who was so astonished at what was passing that he
Title:  awaited a second sign from his interlocutor before he
Title:  obeyed.
Title:  
Title:  "You are brave, Monsieur d'Artagnan," continued his
Title:  Eminence; "you are prudent, which is still better.  I like
Title:  men of head and heart.  Don't be afraid," said he, smiling.
Title:  "By men of heart I mean men of courage. But young as you
Title:  are, and scarcely entering into the world, you have powerful
Title:  enemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroy
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, monseigneur!" replied the young man, "very easily, no
Title:  doubt, for they are strong and well supported, while I am
Title:  alone."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that's true; but alone as you are, you have done much
Title:  already, and will do still more, I don't doubt.  Yet you
Title:  have need, I believe, to be guided in the adventurous career
Title:  you have undertaken; for, if I mistake not, you came to
Title:  Paris with the ambitious idea of making your fortune."
Title:  
Title:  "I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur," said
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you
Title:  are a man of understanding.  Now, what would you say to an
Title:  ensign's commission in my Guards, and a company after the
Title:  campaign?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "You accept it, do you not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," replied d'Artagnan, with an embarrassed air.
Title:  
Title:  "How?  You refuse?" cried the cardinal, with astonishment.
Title:  
Title:  "I am in his Majesty's Guards, monseigneur, and I have no
Title:  reason to be dissatisfied."
Title:  
Title:  "But it appears to me that my Guards--mine--are also his
Title:  Majesty's Guards; and whoever serves in a French corps
Title:  serves the king."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words."
Title:  
Title:  "You want a pretext, do you not?  I comprehend.  Well, you
Title:  have this excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, the
Title:  opportunity which I offer you--so much for the world.  As
Title:  regards yourself, the need of protection; for it is fit you
Title:  should know, Monsieur d'Artagnan, that I have received heavy
Title:  and serious complaints against you.  You do not consecrate
Title:  your days and nights wholly to the king's service."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan colored.
Title:  
Title:  "In fact," said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundle
Title:  of papers, "I have here a whole pile which concerns you.  I
Title:  know you to be a man of resolution; and your services, well
Title:  directed, instead of leading you to ill, might be very
Title:  advantageous to you.  Come; reflect, and decide."
Title:  
Title:  "Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur," replied
Title:  d'Artagnan, "and I am conscious of a greatness of soul in
Title:  your Eminence that makes me mean as an earthworm; but since
Title:  Monseigneur permits me to speak freely--"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan paused.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; speak."
Title:  
Title:  "Then, I will presume to say that all my friends are in the
Title:  king's Musketeers and Guards, and that by an inconceivable
Title:  fatality my enemies are in the service of your Eminence; I
Title:  should, therefore, be ill received here and ill regarded
Title:  there if I accepted what Monseigneur offers me."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you happen to entertain the haughty idea that I have not
Title:  yet made you an offer equal to your value?" asked the
Title:  cardinal, with a smile of disdain.
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind to
Title:  me; and on the contrary, I think I have not proved myself
Title:  worthy of your goodness.  The siege of La Rochelle is about
Title:  to be resumed, monseigneur.  I shall serve under the eye of
Title:  your Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to conduct
Title:  myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your
Title:  attention, then I shall at least leave behind me some
Title:  brilliant action to justify the protection with which you
Title:  honor me.  Everything is best in its time, monseigneur.
Title:  Hereafter, perhaps, I shall have the right of giving myself;
Title:  at present I shall appear to sell myself."
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, you refuse to serve me, monsieur," said the
Title:  cardinal, with a tone of vexation, through which, however,
Title:  might be seen a sort of esteem; "remain free, then, and
Title:  guard your hatreds and your sympathies."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, well," said the cardinal, "I don't wish you any ill;
Title:  but you must be aware that it is quite trouble enough to
Title:  defend and recompense our friends.  We owe nothing to our
Title:  enemies; and let me give you a piece of advice; take care of
Title:  yourself, Monsieur d'Artagnan, for from the moment I
Title:  withdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an obolus
Title:  for your life."
Title:  
Title:  "I will try to do so, monseigneur," replied the Gascon, with
Title:  a noble confidence.
Title:  
Title:  "Remember at a later period and at a certain moment, if any
Title:  mischance should happen to you," said Richelieu,
Title:  significantly, "that it was I who came to seek you, and that
Title:  I did all in my power to prevent this misfortune befalling
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "I shall entertain, whatever may happen," said d'Artagnan,
Title:  placing his hand upon his breast and bowing, "an eternal
Title:  gratitude toward your Eminence for that which you now do for
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, let it be, then, as you have said, Monsieur
Title:  d'Artagnan; we shall see each other again after the
Title:  campaign.  I will have my eye upon you, for I shall be
Title:  there," replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger to a
Title:  magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, "and on our
Title:  return, well--we will settle our account!"
Title:  
Title:  "Young man," said Richelieu, "if I shall be able to say to
Title:  you at another time what I have said to you today, I promise
Title:  you to do so."
Title:  
Title:  This last expression of Richelieu's conveyed a terrible
Title:  doubt; it alarmed d'Artagnan more than a menace would have
Title:  done, for it was a warning.  The cardinal, then, was seeking
Title:  to preserve him from some misfortune which threatened him.
Title:  He opened his mouth to reply, but with a haughty gesture the
Title:  cardinal dismissed him.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failed
Title:  him, and he felt inclined to return.  Then the noble and
Title:  severe countenance of Athos crossed his mind; if he made the
Title:  compact with the cardinal which he required, Athos would no
Title:  more give him his hand--Athos would renounce him.
Title:  
Title:  It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is the
Title:  influence of a truly great character on all that surrounds
Title:  it.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he had
Title:  entered, and found Athos and the four Musketeers waiting his
Title:  appearance, and beginning to grow uneasy.  With a word,
Title:  d'Artagnan reassured them; and Planchet ran to inform the
Title:  other sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer, as
Title:  his master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquired
Title:  eagerly the cause of the strange interview; but d'Artagnan
Title:  confined himself to telling them that M. de Richelieu had
Title:  sent for him to propose to him to enter into his guards with
Title:  the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.
Title:  
Title:  "And you were right," cried Aramis and Porthos, with one
Title:  voice.
Title:  
Title:  Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing.
Title:  But when they were alone he said, "You have done that which
Title:  you ought to have done, d'Artagnan; but perhaps you have
Title:  been wrong."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to a
Title:  secret voice of his soul, which told him that great
Title:  misfortunes awaited him.
Title:  
Title:  The whole of the next day was spent in preparations for
Title:  departure.  D'Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Treville.
Title:  At that time it was believed that the separation of the
Title:  Musketeers and the Guards would be but momentary, the king
Title:  holding his Parliament that very day and proposing to set
Title:  out the day after.  M. de Treville contented himself with
Title:  asking d'Artagnan if he could do anything for him, but
Title:  d'Artagnan answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.
Title:  
Title:  That night brought together all those comrades of the Guards
Title:  of M. Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. de
Title:  Treville who had been accustomed to associate together.
Title:  They were parting to meet again when it pleased God, and if
Title:  it pleased God.  That night, then, was somewhat riotous, as
Title:  may be imagined.  In such cases extreme preoccupation is
Title:  only to be combated by extreme carelessness.
Title:  
Title:  At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends
Title:  separated; the Musketeers hastening to the hotel of M. de
Title:  Treville, the Guards to that of M. Dessessart.  Each of the
Title:  captains then led his company to the Louvre, where the king
Title:  held his review.
Title:  
Title:  The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a little
Title:  from his usual lofty bearing.  In fact, the evening before,
Title:  a fever had seized him in the midst of the Parliament, while
Title:  he was holding his Bed of Justice.  He had, not the less,
Title:  decided upon setting out that same evening; and in spite of
Title:  the remonstrances that had been offered to him, he persisted
Title:  in having the review, hoping by setting it at defiance to
Title:  conquer the disease which began to lay hold upon him.
Title:  
Title:  The review over, the Guards set forward alone on their
Title:  march, the Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowed
Title:  Porthos time to go and take a turn in his superb equipment
Title:  in the Rue aux Ours.
Title:  
Title:  The procurator's wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on
Title:  his fine horse.  She loved Porthos too dearly to allow him
Title:  to part thus; she made him a sign to dismount and come to
Title:  her.  Porthos was magnificent; his spurs jingled, his
Title:  cuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against his
Title:  ample limbs.  This time the clerks evinced no inclination to
Title:  laugh, such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.
Title:  
Title:  The Musketeer was introduced to M. Coquenard, whose little
Title:  gray eyes sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all
Title:  blazing new.  Nevertheless, one thing afforded him inward
Title:  consolation; it was expected by everybody that the campaign
Title:  would be a severe one.  He whispered a hope to himself that
Title:  this beloved relative might be killed in the field.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos paid his compliments to M. Coquenard and bade him
Title:  farewell.  M. Coquenard wished him all sorts of
Title:  prosperities.  As to Mme. Coquenard, she could not restrain
Title:  her tears; but no evil impressions were taken from her grief
Title:  as she was known to be very much attached to her relatives,
Title:  about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with
Title:  her husband.
Title:  
Title:  But the real adieux were made in Mme. Coquenard's chamber;
Title:  they were heartrending.
Title:  
Title:  As long as the procurator's wife could follow him with her
Title:  eyes, she waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far out
Title:  of the window as to lead people to believe she wished to
Title:  precipitate herself.  Porthos received all these attentions
Title:  like a man accustomed to such demonstrations, only on
Title:  turning the corner of the street he lifted his hat
Title:  gracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.
Title:  
Title:  On his part Aramis wrote a long letter.  To whom?  Nobody
Title:  knew.  Kitty, who was to set out that evening for Tours, was
Title:  waiting in the next chamber.
Title:  
Title:  Athos sipped the last bottle of his Spanish wine.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime d'Artagnan was defiling with his company.
Title:  Arriving at the Faubourg St. Antoine, he turned round to
Title:  look gaily at the Bastille; but as it was the Bastille alone
Title:  he looked at, he did not observe Milady, who, mounted upon a
Title:  light chestnut horse, designated him with her finger to two
Title:  ill-looking men who came close up to the ranks to take
Title:  notice of him.  To a look of interrogation which they made,
Title:  Milady replied by a sign that it was he.  Then, certain that
Title:  there could be no mistake in the execution of her orders,
Title:  she started her horse and disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  The two men followed the company, and on leaving the
Title:  Faubourg St. Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped,
Title:  which a servant without livery had waiting for them.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  41  THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE
Title:  
Title:  The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political
Title:  events of the reign of Louis XIII, and one of the great
Title:  military enterprises of the cardinal.  It is, then,
Title:  interesting and even necessary that we should say a few
Title:  words about it, particularly as many details of this siege
Title:  are connected in too important a manner with the story we
Title:  have undertaken to relate to allow us to pass it over in
Title:  silence.
Title:  
Title:  The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this
Title:  siege were extensive.  Let us unfold them first, and then
Title:  pass on to the private plans which perhaps had not less
Title:  influence upon his Eminence than the others.
Title:  
Title:  Of the important cities given up by Henry IV to the
Title:  Huguenots as places of safety, there only remained La
Title:  Rochelle.  It became necessary, therefore, to destroy this
Title:  last bulwark of Calvinism--a dangerous leaven with which the
Title:  ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly
Title:  mingling.
Title:  
Title:  Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers
Title:  of all nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect,
Title:  flocked at the first summons under the standard of the
Title:  Protestants, and organized themselves like a vast
Title:  association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts
Title:  of Europe.
Title:  
Title:  La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the
Title:  ruin of the other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of
Title:  dissensions and ambition.  Moreover, its port was the last
Title:  in the kingdom of France open to the English, and by closing
Title:  it against England, our eternal enemy, the cardinal
Title:  completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.
Title:  
Title:  Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic--
Title:  Protestant by conviction and Catholic as commander of the
Title:  order of the Holy Ghost; Bassompierre, who was a German by
Title:  birth and a Frenchman at heart--in short, Bassompierre, who
Title:  had a distinguished command at the siege of La Rochelle,
Title:  said, in charging at the head of several other Protestant
Title:  nobles like himself, "You will see, gentlemen, that we shall
Title:  be fools enough to take La Rochelle."
Title:  
Title:  And Bassompierre was right.  The cannonade of the Isle of Re
Title:  presaged to him the dragonnades of the Cevennes; the taking
Title:  of La Rochelle was the preface to the revocation of the
Title:  Edict of Nantes.
Title:  
Title:  We have hinted that by the side of these views of the
Title:  leveling and simplifying minister, which belong to history,
Title:  the chronicler is forced to recognize the lesser motives of
Title:  the amorous man and jealous rival.
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen.  Was this
Title:  love a simple political affair, or was it naturally one of
Title:  those profound passions which Anne of Austria inspired in
Title:  those who approached her?  That we are not able to say; but
Title:  at all events, we have seen, by the anterior developments of
Title:  this story, that Buckingham had the advantage over him, and
Title:  in two or three circumstances, particularly that of the
Title:  diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three
Title:  Musketeers and the courage and conduct of d'Artagnan,
Title:  cruelly mystified him.
Title:  
Title:  It was, then, Richelieu's object, not only to get rid of an
Title:  enemy of France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but this
Title:  vengeance must be grand and striking and worthy in every way
Title:  of a man who held in his hand, as his weapon for combat, the
Title:  forces of a kingdom.
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu knew that in combating England he combated
Title:  Buckingham; that in triumphing over England he triumphed
Title:  over Buckingham--in short, that in humiliating England in
Title:  the eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham in the eyes of
Title:  the queen.
Title:  
Title:  On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honor
Title:  of England, was moved by interests exactly like those of the
Title:  cardinal.  Buckingham also was pursuing a private vengeance.
Title:  Buckingham could not under any pretense be admitted into
Title:  France as an ambassador; he wished to enter it as a
Title:  conqueror.
Title:  
Title:  It resulted from this that the real stake in this game,
Title:  which two most powerful kingdoms played for the good
Title:  pleasure of two amorous men, was simply a kind look from
Title:  Anne of Austria.
Title:  
Title:  The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham.  Arriving
Title:  unexpectedly in sight of the Isle of Re with ninety vessels
Title:  and nearly twenty thousand men, he had surprised the Comte
Title:  de Toiras, who commanded for the king in the Isle, and he
Title:  had, after a bloody conflict, effected his landing.
Title:  
Title:  Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished
Title:  the Baron de Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a
Title:  little orphan girl eighteen months old, and that this little
Title:  girl was afterward Mme. de Sevigne.
Title:  
Title:  The Comte de Toiras retired into the citadel St. Martin with
Title:  his garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fort
Title:  called the fort of La Pree.
Title:  
Title:  This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; and
Title:  till the king and he could take the command of the siege of
Title:  La Rochelle, which was determined, he had sent Monsieur to
Title:  direct the first operations, and had ordered all the troops
Title:  he could dispose of to march toward the theater of war.  It
Title:  was of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our friend
Title:  d'Artagnan formed a part.
Title:  
Title:  The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bed
Title:  of Justice had been held; but on rising from his Bed of
Title:  Justice on the twenty-eighth of June, he felt himself
Title:  attacked by fever.  He was, notwithstanding, anxious to set
Title:  out; but his illness becoming more serious, he was forced to
Title:  stop at Villeroy.
Title:  
Title:  Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted.  It
Title:  followed that d'Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simply
Title:  in the Guards, found himself, for the time at least,
Title:  separated from his good friends--Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
Title:  This separation, which was no more than an unpleasant
Title:  circumstance, would have certainly become a cause of serious
Title:  uneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknown
Title:  dangers he was surrounded.
Title:  
Title:  He, however, arrived without accident in the camp
Title:  established before La Rochelle, of the tenth of the month of
Title:  September of the year 1627.
Title:  
Title:  Everything was in the same state.  The Duke of Buckingham
Title:  and his English, masters of the Isle of Re, continued to
Title:  besiege, but without success, the citadel St. Martin and the
Title:  fort of La Pree; and hostilities with La Rochelle had
Title:  commenced, two or three days before, about a fort which the
Title:  Duc d'Angouleme had caused to be constructed near the city.
Title:  
Title:  The Guards, under the command of M. Dessessart, took up
Title:  their quarters at the Minimes; but, as we know, d'Artagnan,
Title:  possessed with ambition to enter the Musketeers, had formed
Title:  but few friendships among his comrades, and he felt himself
Title:  isolated and given up to his own reflections.
Title:  
Title:  His reflections were not very cheerful.  From the time of
Title:  his arrival in Paris, he had been mixed up with public
Title:  affairs; but his own private affairs had made no great
Title:  progress, either in love or fortune.  As to love, the only
Title:  woman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able to
Title:  discover what had become of her.  As to fortune, he had
Title:  made--he, humble as he was--an enemy of the cardinal; that
Title:  is to say, of a man before whom trembled the greatest men of
Title:  the kingdom, beginning with the king.
Title:  
Title:  That man had the power to crush him, and yet he had not done
Title:  so.  For a mind so perspicuous as that of d'Artagnan, this
Title:  indulgence was a light by which he caught a glimpse of a
Title:  better future.
Title:  
Title:  Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared,
Title:  he thought; but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not to
Title:  be despised.  This enemy was Milady.
Title:  
Title:  In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection and
Title:  good will of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at
Title:  the present time an additional cause of persecution, and her
Title:  protection, as it was known, protected badly--as witness
Title:  Chalais and Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond,
Title:  worth five or six thousand livres, which he wore on his
Title:  finger; and even this diamond--supposing that d'Artagnan, in
Title:  his projects of ambition, wished to keep it, to make it
Title:  someday a pledge for the gratitude of the queen--had not in
Title:  the meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more value
Title:  than the gravel he trod under his feet.
Title:  
Title:  We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for d'Artagnan
Title:  made these reflections while walking solitarily along a
Title:  pretty little road which led from the camp to the village of
Title:  Angoutin.  Now, these reflections had led him further than
Title:  he intended, and the day was beginning to decline when, by
Title:  the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the
Title:  barrel of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding.  He
Title:  comprehended that the musket had not come there of itself,
Title:  and that he who bore it had not concealed himself behind a
Title:  hedge with any friendly intentions.  He determined,
Title:  therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he could
Title:  when, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock,
Title:  he perceived the extremity of another musket.
Title:  
Title:  This was evidently an ambuscade.
Title:  
Title:  The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw,
Title:  with a certain degree of inquietude, that it was leveled in
Title:  his direction; but as soon as he perceived that the orifice
Title:  of the barrel was motionless, he threw himself upon the
Title:  ground.  At the same instant the gun was fired, and he heard
Title:  the whistling of a ball pass over his head.
Title:  
Title:  No time was to be lost.  D'Artagnan sprang up with a bound,
Title:  and at the same instant the ball from the other musket tore
Title:  up the gravel on the very spot on the road where he had
Title:  thrown himself with his face to the ground.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a
Title:  ridiculous death in order that it may be said of them that
Title:  they did not retreat a single step.  Besides, courage was
Title:  out of the question here; d'Artagnan had fallen into an
Title:  ambush.
Title:  
Title:  "If there is a third shot," said he to himself, "I am a lost
Title:  man."
Title:  
Title:  He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran toward
Title:  the camp, with the swiftness of the young men of his
Title:  country, so renowned for their agility; but whatever might
Title:  be his speed, the first who fired, having had time to
Title:  reload, fired a second shot, and this time so well aimed
Title:  that it struck his hat, and carried it ten paces from him.
Title:  
Title:  As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as he
Title:  ran, and arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of
Title:  breath.  He sat down without saying a word to anybody, and
Title:  began to reflect.
Title:  
Title:  This event might have three causes:
Title:  
Title:  The first and the most natural was that it might be an
Title:  ambuscade of the Rochellais, who might not be sorry to kill
Title:  one of his Majesty's Guards, because it would be an enemy
Title:  the less, and this enemy might have a well-furnished purse
Title:  in his pocket.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball,
Title:  and shook his head.  The ball was not a musket ball--it was
Title:  an arquebus ball.  The accuracy of the aim had first given
Title:  him the idea that a special weapon had been employed.  This
Title:  could not, then, be a military ambuscade, as the ball was
Title:  not of the regular caliber.
Title:  
Title:  This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal.
Title:  It may be observed that at the very moment when, thanks to
Title:  the ray of the sun, he perceived the gun barrel, he was
Title:  thinking with astonishment on the forbearance of his
Title:  Eminence with respect to him.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan again shook his head.  For people toward whom
Title:  he had but to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarely
Title:  recourse to such means.
Title:  
Title:  It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.
Title:  
Title:  He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of the
Title:  assassins; he had escaped so rapidly that he had not had
Title:  leisure to notice anything.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my poor friends!" murmured d'Artagnan; "where are you?
Title:  And that you should fail me!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan passed a very bad night.  Three or four times he
Title:  started up, imagining that a man was approaching his bed for
Title:  the purpose of stabbing him.  Nevertheless, day dawned
Title:  without darkness having brought any accident.
Title:  
Title:  But d'Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferred
Title:  was not relinquished.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as a
Title:  reason to himself that the weather was bad.
Title:  
Title:  At nine o'clock the next morning, the drums beat to arms.
Title:  The Duc d'Orleans visited the posts.  The guards were under
Title:  arms, and d'Artagnan took his place in the midst of his
Title:  comrades.
Title:  
Title:  Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all the
Title:  superior officers approached him to pay their compliments,
Title:  M. Dessessart, captain of the Guards, as well as the others.
Title:  
Title:  At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared to
Title:  d'Artagnan that M. Dessessart made him a sign to approach.
Title:  He waited for a fresh gesture on the part of his superior,
Title:  for fear he might be mistaken; but this gesture being
Title:  repeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive orders.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for a
Title:  dangerous mission, but one which will do honor to those who
Title:  shall accomplish it; and I made you a sign in order that you
Title:  might hold yourself in readiness."
Title:  
Title:  "Thanks, my captain!" replied d'Artagnan, who wished for
Title:  nothing better than an opportunity to distinguish himself
Title:  under the eye of the lieutenant general.
Title:  
Title:  In fact the Rochellais had made a sortie during the night,
Title:  and had retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gained
Title:  possession two days before.  The matter was to ascertain, by
Title:  reconnoitering, how the enemy guarded this bastion.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, and
Title:  said, "I want for this mission three or four volunteers, led
Title:  by a man who can be depended upon."
Title:  
Title:  "As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under my
Title:  hand, monsieur," said M. Dessessart, pointing to d'Artagnan;
Title:  "and as to the four or five volunteers, Monsieur has but to
Title:  make his intentions known, and the men will not be wanting."
Title:  
Title:  "Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!"
Title:  said d'Artagnan, raising his sword.
Title:  
Title:  Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang
Title:  forward, and two other soldiers having joined them, the
Title:  number was deemed sufficient.  D'Artagnan declined all
Title:  others, being unwilling to take the first chance from those
Title:  who had the priority.
Title:  
Title:  It was not known whether, after the taking of the bastion,
Title:  the Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it;
Title:  the object then was to examine the place near enough to
Title:  verify the reports.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followed
Title:  the trench; the two Guards marched abreast with him, and the
Title:  two soldiers followed behind.
Title:  
Title:  They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench,
Title:  till they came within a hundred paces of the bastion.
Title:  There, on turning round, d'Artagnan perceived that the two
Title:  soldiers had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayed
Title:  behind, and he continued to advance.
Title:  
Title:  At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves
Title:  within about sixty paces of the bastion.  They saw no one,
Title:  and the bastion seemed abandoned.
Title:  
Title:  The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating
Title:  whether they should proceed any further, when all at once a
Title:  circle of smoke enveloped the giant of stone, and a dozen
Title:  balls came whistling around d'Artagnan and his companions.
Title:  
Title:  They knew all they wished to know; the bastion was guarded.
Title:  A longer stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless
Title:  imprudence.  D'Artagnan and his two companions turned their
Title:  backs, and commenced a retreat which resembled a flight.
Title:  
Title:  On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve
Title:  them as a rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell.  A ball had
Title:  passed through his breast.  The other, who was safe and
Title:  sound, continued his way toward the camp.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus,
Title:  and stooped to raise him and assist him in regaining the
Title:  lines; but at this moment two shots were fired.  One ball
Title:  struck the head of the already-wounded guard, and the other
Title:  flattened itself against a rock, after having passed within
Title:  two inches of d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  The young man turned quickly round, for this attack could
Title:  not have come from the bastion, which was hidden by the
Title:  angle of the trench.  The idea of the two soldiers who had
Title:  abandoned him occurred to his mind, and with them he
Title:  remembered the assassins of two evenings before.  He
Title:  resolved this time to know with whom he had to deal, and
Title:  fell upon the body of his comrade as if he were dead.
Title:  
Title:  He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work
Title:  within thirty paces of him; they were the heads of the two
Title:  soldiers.  D'Artagnan had not been deceived; these two men
Title:  had only followed for the purpose of assassinating him,
Title:  hoping that the young man's death would be placed to the
Title:  account of the enemy.
Title:  
Title:  As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime,
Title:  they came up to him with the purpose of making sure.
Title:  Fortunately, deceived by d'Artagnan's trick, they neglected
Title:  to reload their guns.
Title:  
Title:  When they were within ten paces of him, d'Artagnan, who in
Title:  falling had taken care not to let go his sword, sprang up
Title:  close to them.
Title:  
Title:  The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp
Title:  without having killed their man, they should be accused by
Title:  him; therefore their first idea was to join the enemy.  One
Title:  of them took his gun by the barrel, and used it as he would
Title:  a club.  He aimed a terrible blow at d'Artagnan, who avoided
Title:  it by springing to one side; but by this movement he left a
Title:  passage free to the bandit, who darted off toward the
Title:  bastion.  As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion were
Title:  ignorant of the intentions of the man they saw coming toward
Title:  them, they fired upon him, and he fell, struck by a ball
Title:  which broke his shoulder.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime d'Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other
Title:  soldier, attacking him with his sword.  The conflict was not
Title:  long; the wretch had nothing to defend himself with but his
Title:  discharged arquebus.  The sword of the Guardsman slipped
Title:  along the barrel of the now-useless weapon, and passed
Title:  through the thigh of the assassin, who fell.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his
Title:  throat.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, do not kill me!" cried the bandit.  "Pardon, pardon, my
Title:  officer, and I will tell you all."
Title:  
Title:  "Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your
Title:  life for it?" asked the young man, withholding his arm.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man of
Title:  twenty, as you are, and who may hope for everything, being
Title:  handsome and brave, as you are."
Title:  
Title:  "Wretch," cried d'Artagnan, "speak quickly!  Who employed
Title:  you to assassinate me?"
Title:  
Title:  "A woman whom I don't know, but who is called Milady."
Title:  
Title:  "But if you don't know this woman, how do you know her
Title:  name?"
Title:  
Title:  "My comrade knows her, and called her so.  It was with him
Title:  she agreed, and not with me; he even has in his pocket a
Title:  letter from that person, who attaches great importance to
Title:  you, as I have heard him say."
Title:  
Title:  "But how did you become concerned in this villainous
Title:  affair?"
Title:  
Title:  "He proposed to me to undertake it with him, and I agreed."
Title:  
Title:  "And how much did she give you for this fine enterprise?"
Title:  
Title:  "A hundred louis."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, come!" said the young man, laughing, "she thinks I am
Title:  worth something.  A hundred louis?  Well, that was a
Title:  temptation for two wretches like you.  I understand why you
Title:  accepted it, and I grant you my pardon; but upon one
Title:  condition."
Title:  
Title:  "What is that?" said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving that
Title:  all was not over.
Title:  
Title:  "That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has
Title:  in his pocket."
Title:  
Title:  "But," cried the bandit, "that is only another way of
Title:  killing me.  How can I go and fetch that letter under the
Title:  fire of the bastion?"
Title:  
Title:  "You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it,
Title:  or I swear you shall die by my hand."
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon, monsieur; pity!  In the name of that young lady you
Title:  love, and whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!"
Title:  cried the bandit, throwing himself upon his knees and
Title:  leaning upon his hand--for he began to lose his strength
Title:  with his blood.
Title:  
Title:  "And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, and
Title:  that I believed that woman dead?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket."
Title:  
Title:  "You see, then," said d'Artagnan, "that I must have that
Title:  letter.  So no more delay, no more hesitation; or else
Title:  whatever may be my repugnance to soiling my sword a second
Title:  time with the blood of a wretch like you, I swear by my
Title:  faith as an honest man--" and at these words d'Artagnan made
Title:  so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up.
Title:  
Title:  "Stop, stop!" cried he, regaining strength by force of
Title:  terror.  "I will go--I will go!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took the soldier's arquebus, made him go on
Title:  before him, and urged him toward his companion by pricking
Title:  him behind with his sword.
Title:  
Title:  It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a long
Title:  track of blood on the ground he passed over, pale with
Title:  approaching death, trying to drag himself along without
Title:  being seen to the body of his accomplice, which lay twenty
Title:  paces from him.
Title:  
Title:  Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with a
Title:  cold sweat, that d'Artagnan took pity on him, and casting
Title:  upon him a look of contempt, "Stop," said he, "I will show
Title:  you the difference between a man of courage and such a
Title:  coward as you.  Stay where you are; I will go myself."
Title:  
Title:  And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing the
Title:  movements of the enemy and taking advantage of the accidents
Title:  of the ground, d'Artagnan succeeded in reaching the second
Title:  soldier.
Title:  
Title:  There were two means of gaining his object--to search him on
Title:  the spot, or to carry him away, making a buckler of his
Title:  body, and search him in the trench.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted the
Title:  assassin onto his shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.
Title:  
Title:  A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls which
Title:  penetrated the flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony,
Title:  proved to d'Artagnan that the would-be assassin had saved
Title:  his life.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse beside
Title:  the wounded man, who was as pale as death.
Title:  
Title:  Then he began to search.  A leather pocketbook, a purse, in
Title:  which was evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had
Title:  received, with a dice box and dice, completed the
Title:  possessions of the dead man.
Title:  
Title:  He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse to
Title:  the wounded man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.
Title:  
Title:  Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter,
Title:  that which he had sought at the risk of his life:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in
Title:  safety in the convent, which you should never have allowed
Title:  her to reach, try, at least, not to miss the man.  If you
Title:  do, you know that my hand stretches far, and that you shall
Title:  pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have from me."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  No signature.  Nevertheless it was plain the letter came
Title:  from Milady.  He consequently kept it as a piece of
Title:  evidence, and being in safety behind the angle of the
Title:  trench, he began to interrogate the wounded man.  He
Title:  confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade--the same
Title:  who was killed--to carry off a young woman who was to leave
Title:  Paris by the Barriere de La Villette; but having stopped to
Title:  drink at a cabaret, they had missed the carriage by ten
Title:  minutes.
Title:  
Title:  "But what were you to do with that woman?" asked d'Artagnan,
Title:  with anguish.
Title:  
Title:  "We were to have conveyed her to a hotel in the Place
Title:  Royale," said the wounded man.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes!" murmured d'Artagnan; "that's the place--Milady's
Title:  own residence!"
Title:  
Title:  Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible
Title:  thirst for vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, as
Title:  well as all who loved him, and how well she must be
Title:  acquainted with the affairs of the court, since she had
Title:  discovered all.  There could be no doubt she owed this
Title:  information to the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy,
Title:  that the queen must have discovered the prison in which poor
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux was explaining her devotion, and that she had
Title:  freed her from that prison; and the letter he had received
Title:  from the young woman, and her passage along the road of
Title:  Chaillot like an apparition, were now explained.
Title:  
Title:  Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to
Title:  find Mme. Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.
Title:  
Title:  This idea completely restored clemency to his heart.  He
Title:  turned toward the wounded man, who had watched with intense
Title:  anxiety all the various expressions of his countenance, and
Title:  holding out his arm to him, said, "Come, I will not abandon
Title:  you thus.  Lean upon me, and let us return to the camp."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said the man, who could scarcely believe in such
Title:  magnanimity, "but is it not to have me hanged?"
Title:  
Title:  "You have my word," said he; "for the second time I give you
Title:  your life."
Title:  
Title:  The wounded man sank upon his knees, to again kiss the feet
Title:  of his preserver; but d'Artagnan, who had no longer a motive
Title:  for staying so near the enemy, abridged the testimonials of
Title:  his gratitude.
Title:  
Title:  The Guardsman who had returned at the first discharge
Title:  announced the death of his four companions.  They were
Title:  therefore much astonished and delighted in the regiment when
Title:  they saw the young man come back safe and sound.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a
Title:  sortie which he improvised.  He described the death of the
Title:  other soldier, and the perils they had encountered.  This
Title:  recital was for him the occasion of veritable triumph.  The
Title:  whole army talked of this expedition for a day, and Monsieur
Title:  paid him his compliments upon it.  Besides this, as every
Title:  great action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploit
Title:  of d'Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility
Title:  he had lost.  In fact, d'Artagnan believed that he might be
Title:  tranquil, as one of his two enemies was killed and the other
Title:  devoted to his interests.
Title:  
Title:  This tranquillity proved one thing--that d'Artagnan did not
Title:  yet know Milady.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  42  THE ANJOU WINE
Title:  
Title:  After the most disheartening news of the king's health, a
Title:  report of his convalescence began to prevail in the camp;
Title:  and as he was very anxious to be in person at the siege, it
Title:  was said that as soon as he could mount a horse he would set
Title:  forward.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the other
Title:  he might expect to be removed from his command by the Duc
Title:  d'Angouleme, by Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were all
Title:  eager for his post, did but little, lost his days in
Title:  wavering, and did not dare to attempt any great enterprise
Title:  to drive the English from the Isle of Re, where they still
Title:  besieged the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree, as
Title:  on their side the French were besieging La Rochelle.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, as
Title:  always happens after a past danger, particularly when the
Title:  danger seems to have vanished.  He only felt one uneasiness,
Title:  and that was at not hearing any tidings from his friends.
Title:  
Title:  But one morning at the commencement of the month of November
Title:  everything was explained to him by this letter, dated from
Title:  Villeroy:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  M. d'Artagnan,
Title:  
Title:  MM. Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after having
Title:  had an entertainment at my house and enjoying themselves
Title:  very much, created such a disturbance that the provost of
Title:  the castle, a rigid man, has ordered them to be confined for
Title:  some days; but I accomplish the order they have given me by
Title:  forwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou wine, with
Title:  which they are much pleased.  They are desirous that you
Title:  should drink to their health in their favorite wine.  I have
Title:  done this, and am, monsieur, with great respect,
Title:  
Title:  Your very humble and obedient servant,
Title:  
Title:  Godeau, Purveyor of the Musketeers
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "That's all well!" cried d'Artagnan.  "They think of me in
Title:  their pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles.  Well,
Title:  I will certainly drink to their health with all my heart,
Title:  but I will not drink alone."
Title:  
Title:  And d'Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he had
Title:  formed greater intimacy than with the others, to invite them
Title:  to enjoy with him this present of delicious Anjou wine which
Title:  had been sent him from Villeroy.
Title:  
Title:  One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, and
Title:  another the next, so the meeting was fixed for the day after
Title:  that.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine
Title:  to the refreshment room of the Guards, with strict orders
Title:  that great care should be taken of it; and then, on the day
Title:  appointed, as the dinner was fixed for midday d'Artagnan
Title:  sent Planchet at nine in the morning to assist in preparing
Title:  everything for the entertainment.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet, very proud of being raised to the dignity of
Title:  landlord, thought he would make all ready, like an
Title:  intelligent man; and with this view called in the assistance
Title:  of the lackey of one of his master's guests, named Fourreau,
Title:  and the false soldier who had tried to kill d'Artagnan and
Title:  who, belonging to no corps, had entered into the service of
Title:  d'Artagnan, or rather of Planchet, after d'Artagnan had
Title:  saved his life.
Title:  
Title:  The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived,
Title:  took their places, and the dishes were arranged on the
Title:  table.  Planchet waited, towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the
Title:  bottles; and Brisemont, which was the name of the
Title:  convalescent, poured the wine, which was a little shaken by
Title:  its journey, carefully into decanters.  Of this wine, the
Title:  first bottle being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemont
Title:  poured the lees into a glass, and d'Artagnan desired him to
Title:  drink it, for the poor devil had not yet recovered his
Title:  strength.
Title:  
Title:  The guests having eaten the soup, were about to lift the
Title:  first glass of wine to their lips, when all at once the
Title:  cannon sounded from Fort Louis and Fort Neuf.  The
Title:  Guardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some unexpected
Title:  attack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang to
Title:  their swords.  D'Artagnan, not less forward than they, did
Title:  likewise, and all ran out, in order to repair to their
Title:  posts.
Title:  
Title:  But scarcely were they out of the room before they were made
Title:  aware of the cause of this noise.  Cries of "Live the king!
Title:  Live the cardinal!" resounded on every side, and the drums
Title:  were beaten in all directions.
Title:  
Title:  In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come by
Title:  forced marches, and had that moment arrived with all his
Title:  household and a reinforcement of ten thousand troops.  His
Title:  Musketeers proceeded and followed him.  D'Artagnan, placed
Title:  in line with his company, saluted with an expressive gesture
Title:  his three friends, whose eyes soon discovered him, and M. de
Title:  Treville, who detected him at once.
Title:  
Title:  The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soon
Title:  in one another's arms.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardieu!" cried d'Artagnan, "you could not have arrived in
Title:  better time; the dinner cannot have had time to get cold!
Title:  Can it, gentlemen?" added the young man, turning to the two
Title:  Guards, whom he introduced to his friends.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said Porthos, "it appears we are feasting!"
Title:  
Title:  "I hope," said Aramis, "there are no women at your dinner."
Title:  
Title:  "Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?" asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, pardieu! there is yours, my dear friend," replied
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Our wine!" said Athos, astonished.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that you sent me."
Title:  
Title:  "We sent you wine?"
Title:  
Title:  "You know very well--the wine from the hills of Anjou."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I know what brand you are talking about."
Title:  
Title:  "The wine you prefer."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you must
Title:  content yourselves with that."
Title:  
Title:  "And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent you
Title:  some Anjou wine?" said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order."
Title:  
Title:  "On our account?" said the three Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  "Did you send this wine, Aramis?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "No; and you, Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; and you, Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "No!"
Title:  
Title:  "If it was not you, it was your purveyor," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Our purveyor!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, your purveyor, Godeau--the purveyor of the
Title:  Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith! never mind where it comes from," said Porthos,
Title:  "let us taste it, and if it is good, let us drink it."
Title:  
Title:  "No," said Athos; "don't let us drink wine which comes from
Title:  an unknown source."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right, Athos," said d'Artagnan.  "Did none of you
Title:  charge your purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?"
Title:  
Title:  "No!  And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?"
Title:  
Title:  "Here is his letter," said d'Artagnan, and he presented the
Title:  note to his comrades.
Title:  
Title:  "This is not his writing!" said Athos.  "I am acquainted
Title:  with it; before we left Villeroy I settled the accounts of
Title:  the regiment."
Title:  
Title:  "A false letter altogether," said Porthos, "we have not been
Title:  disciplined."
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan," said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, "how could
Title:  you believe that we had made a disturbance?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook all
Title:  his limbs.
Title:  
Title:  "Thou alarmest me!" said Athos, who never used thee and thou
Title:  but upon very particular occasions, "what has happened?"
Title:  
Title:  "Look you, my friends!" cried d'Artagnan, "a horrible
Title:  suspicion crosses my mind!  Can this be another vengeance of
Title:  that woman?"
Title:  
Title:  It was now Athos who turned pale.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the three
Title:  Musketeers and the two Guards following him.
Title:  
Title:  The first object that met the eyes of d'Artagnan on entering
Title:  the room was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground and
Title:  rolling in horrible convulsions.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to give
Title:  him succor; but it was plain that all assistance was
Title:  useless--all the features of the dying man were distorted
Title:  with agony.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!" cried he, on perceiving d'Artagnan, "ah! this is
Title:  frightful!  You pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!"
Title:  
Title:  "I!" cried d'Artagnan.  "I, wretch?  What do you say?"
Title:  
Title:  "I say that it was you who gave me the wine; I say that it
Title:  was you who desired me to drink it.  I say you wished to
Title:  avenge yourself on me, and I say that it is horrible!"
Title:  
Title:  "Do not think so, Brisemont," said d'Artagnan; "do not think
Title:  so.  I swear to you, I protest--"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, but God is above!  God will punish you!  My God, grant
Title:  that he may one day suffer what I suffer!"
Title:  
Title:  "Upon the Gospel," said d'Artagnan, throwing himself down by
Title:  the dying man, "I swear to you that the wine was poisoned
Title:  and that I was going to drink of it as you did."
Title:  
Title:  "I do not believe you," cried the soldier, and he expired
Title:  amid horrible tortures.
Title:  
Title:  "Frightful! frightful!" murmured Athos, while Porthos broke
Title:  the bottles and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, that
Title:  a confessor should be sent for.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my friends," said d'Artagnan, "you come once more to
Title:  save my life, not only mine but that of these gentlemen.
Title:  Gentlemen," continued he, addressing the Guardsmen, "I
Title:  request you will be silent with regard to this adventure.
Title:  Great personages may have had a hand in what you have seen,
Title:  and if talked about, the evil would only recoil upon us."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur!" stammered Planchet, more dead than alive,
Title:  "ah, monsieur, what an escape I have had!"
Title:  
Title:  "How, sirrah! you were going to drink my wine?"
Title:  
Title:  "To the health of the king, monsieur; I was going to drink a
Title:  small glass of it if Fourreau had not told me I was called."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas!" said Fourreau, whose teeth chattered with terror,
Title:  "I wanted to get him out of the way that I might drink myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, addressing the Guardsmen, "you
Title:  may easily comprehend that such a feast can only be very
Title:  dull after what has taken place; so accept my excuses, and
Title:  put off the party till another day, I beg of you."
Title:  
Title:  The two Guardsmen courteously accepted d'Artagnan's excuses,
Title:  and perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone,
Title:  retired.
Title:  
Title:  When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers were
Title:  without witnesses, they looked at one another with an air
Title:  which plainly expressed that each of them perceived the
Title:  gravity of their situation.
Title:  
Title:  "In the first place," said Athos, "let us leave this
Title:  chamber; the dead are not agreeable company, particularly
Title:  when they have died a violent death."
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet," said d'Artagnan, "I commit the corpse of this
Title:  poor devil to your care.  Let him be interred in holy
Title:  ground.  He committed a crime, it is true; but he repented
Title:  of it."
Title:  
Title:  And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet and
Title:  Fourreau the duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.
Title:  
Title:  The host gave them another chamber, and served them with
Title:  fresh eggs and some water, which Athos went himself to draw
Title:  at the fountain.  In a few words, Porthos and Aramis were
Title:  posted as to the situation.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said d'Artagnan to Athos, "you see, my dear friend,
Title:  that this is war to the death."
Title:  
Title:  Athos shook his head.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," replied he, "I perceive that plainly; but do you
Title:  really believe it is she?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am sure of it."
Title:  
Title:  "Nevertheless, I confess I still doubt."
Title:  
Title:  "But the fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?"
Title:  
Title:  "She is some Englishwoman who has committed a crime in
Title:  France, and has been branded in consequence."
Title:  
Title:  "Athos, she is your wife, I tell you," repeated d'Artagnan;
Title:  "only reflect how much the two descriptions resemble each
Title:  other."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but I should think the other must be dead, I hanged
Title:  her so effectually."
Title:  
Title:  It was d'Artagnan who now shook his head in his turn.
Title:  
Title:  "But in either case, what is to be done?" said the young
Title:  man.
Title:  
Title:  "The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hanging
Title:  eternally over his head," said Athos.  "We must extricate
Title:  ourselves from this position."
Title:  
Title:  "But how?"
Title:  
Title:  "Listen!  You must try to see her, and have an explanation
Title:  with her.  Say to her: 'Peace or war!  My word as a
Title:  gentleman never to say anything of you, never to do anything
Title:  against you; on your side, a solemn oath to remain neutral
Title:  with respect to me.  If not, I will apply to the chancellor,
Title:  I will apply to the king, I will apply to the hangman, I
Title:  will move the courts against you, I will denounce you as
Title:  branded, I will bring you to trial; and if you are
Title:  acquitted, well, by the faith of a gentleman, I will kill
Title:  you at the corner of some wall, as I would a mad dog.'"
Title:  
Title:  "I like the means well enough," said d'Artagnan, "but where
Title:  and how to meet with her?"
Title:  
Title:  "Time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity;
Title:  opportunity is the martingale of man.  The more we have
Title:  ventured the more we gain, when we know how to wait."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners."
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!" said Athos.  "God has preserved us hitherto, God will
Title:  preserve us still."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, we.  Besides, we are men; and everything considered,
Title:  it is our lot to risk our lives; but she," asked he, in an
Title:  undertone.
Title:  
Title:  "What she?" asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Constance."
Title:  
Title:  "Madame Bonacieux!  Ah, that's true!" said Athos.  "My poor
Title:  friend, I had forgotten you were in love."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but," said Aramis, "have you not learned by the
Title:  letter you found on the wretched corpse that she is in a
Title:  convent?  One may be very comfortable in a convent; and as
Title:  soon as the siege of La Rochelle is terminated, I promise
Title:  you on my part--"
Title:  
Title:  "Good," cried Athos, "good!  Yes, my dear Aramis, we all
Title:  know that your views have a religious tendency."
Title:  
Title:  "I am only temporarily a Musketeer," said Aramis, humbly.
Title:  
Title:  "It is some time since we heard from his mistress," said
Title:  Athos, in a low voice.  "But take no notice; we know all
Title:  about that."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Porthos, "it appears to me that the means are
Title:  very simple."
Title:  
Title:  "What?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "You say she is in a convent?" replied Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well.  As soon as the siege is over, we'll carry her
Title:  off from that convent."
Title:  
Title:  "But we must first learn what convent she is in."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "But I think I have it," said Athos.  "Don't you say, dear
Title:  d'Artagnan, that it is the queen who has made choice of the
Title:  convent for her?"
Title:  
Title:  "I believe so, at least."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case Porthos will assist us."
Title:  
Title:  "And how so, if you please?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess.  She
Title:  must have a long arm."
Title:  
Title:  "Hush!" said Porthos, placing a finger on his lips.  "I
Title:  believe her to be a cardinalist; she must know nothing of
Title:  the matter."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said Aramis, "I take upon myself to obtain
Title:  intelligence of her."
Title:  
Title:  "You, Aramis?" cried the three friends.  "You!  And how?"
Title:  
Title:  "By the queen's almoner, to whom I am very intimately
Title:  allied," said Aramis, coloring.
Title:  
Title:  And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finished
Title:  their modest repast, separated, with the promise of meeting
Title:  again that evening.  D'Artagnan returned to less important
Title:  affairs, and the three Musketeers repaired to the king's
Title:  quarters, where they had to prepare their lodging.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  43  THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile the king, who, with more reason than the cardinal,
Title:  showed his hatred for Buckingham, although scarcely arrived
Title:  was in such a haste to meet the enemy that he commanded
Title:  every disposition to be made to drive the English from the
Title:  Isle of Re, and afterward to press the siege of La Rochelle;
Title:  but notwithstanding his earnest wish, he was delayed by the
Title:  dissensions which broke out between MM. Bassompierre and
Title:  Schomberg, against the Duc d'Angouleme.
Title:  
Title:  MM. Bassompierre and Schomberg were marshals of France, and
Title:  claimed their right of commanding the army under the orders
Title:  of the king; but the cardinal, who feared that Bassompierre,
Title:  a Huguenot at heart, might press but feebly the English and
Title:  Rochellais, his brothers in religion, supported the Duc
Title:  d'Angouleme, whom the king, at his instigation, had named
Title:  lieutenant general.  The result was that to prevent MM.
Title:  Bassompierre and Schomberg from deserting the army, a
Title:  separate command had to be given to each.  Bassompierre took
Title:  up his quarters on the north of the city, between Leu and
Title:  Dompierre; the Duc d'Angouleme on the east, from Dompierre
Title:  to Perigny; and M. de Schomberg on the south, from Perigny
Title:  to Angoutin.
Title:  
Title:  The quarters of Monsieur were at Dompierre; the quarters of
Title:  the king were sometimes at Estree, sometimes at Jarrie; the
Title:  cardinal's quarters were upon the downs, at the bridge of La
Title:  Pierre, in a simple house without any entrenchment.  So that
Title:  Monsieur watched Bassompierre; the king, the Duc
Title:  d'Angouleme; and the cardinal, M. de Schomberg.
Title:  
Title:  As soon as this organization was established, they set about
Title:  driving the English from the Isle.
Title:  
Title:  The juncture was favorable.  The English, who require, above
Title:  everything, good living in order to be good soldiers, only
Title:  eating salt meat and bad biscuit, had many invalids in their
Title:  camp.  Still further, the sea, very rough at this period of
Title:  the year all along the sea coast, destroyed every day some
Title:  little vessel; and the shore, from the point of l'Aiguillon
Title:  to the trenches, was at every tide literally covered with
Title:  the wrecks of pinnacles, roberges, and feluccas.  The result
Title:  was that even if the king's troops remained quietly in their
Title:  camp, it was evident that some day or other, Buckingham, who
Title:  only continued in the Isle from obstinacy, would be obliged
Title:  to raise the siege.
Title:  
Title:  But as M. de Toiras gave information that everything was
Title:  preparing in the enemy's camp for a fresh assault, the king
Title:  judged that it would be best to put an end to the affair,
Title:  and gave the necessary orders for a decisive action.
Title:  
Title:  As it is not our intention to give a journal of the siege,
Title:  but on the contrary only to describe such of the events of
Title:  it as are connected with the story we are relating, we will
Title:  content ourselves with saying in two words that the
Title:  expedition succeeded, to the great astonishment of the king
Title:  and the great glory of the cardinal.  The English, repulsed
Title:  foot by foot, beaten in all encounters, and defeated in the
Title:  passage of the Isle of Loie, were obliged to re-embark,
Title:  leaving on the field of battle two thousand men, among whom
Title:  were five colonels, three lieutenant colonels, two hundred
Title:  and fifty captains, twenty gentlemen of rank, four pieces of
Title:  cannon, and sixty flags, which were taken to Paris by Claude
Title:  de St. Simon, and suspended with great pomp in the arches of
Title:  Notre Dame.
Title:  
Title:  Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughout
Title:  France.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal was left free to carry on the siege, without
Title:  having, at least at the present, anything to fear on the
Title:  part of the English.
Title:  
Title:  But it must be acknowledged, this response was but
Title:  momentary.  An envoy of the Duke of Buckingham, named
Title:  Montague, was taken, and proof was obtained of a league
Title:  between the German Empire, Spain, England, and Lorraine.
Title:  This league was directed against France.
Title:  
Title:  Still further, in Buckingham's lodging, which he had been
Title:  forced to abandon more precipitately than he expected,
Title:  papers were found which confirmed this alliance and which,
Title:  as the cardinal asserts in his memoirs, strongly compromised
Title:  Mme. de Chevreuse and consequently the queen.
Title:  
Title:  It was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell,
Title:  for one is not a despotic minister without responsibility.
Title:  All, therefore, of the vast resources of his genius were at
Title:  work night and day, engaged in listening to the least report
Title:  heard in any of the great kingdoms of Europe.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal was acquainted with the activity, and more
Title:  particularly the hatred, of Buckingham.  If the league which
Title:  threatened France triumphed, all his influence would be
Title:  lost.  Spanish policy and Austrian policy would have their
Title:  representatives in the cabinet of the Louvre, where they had
Title:  as yet but partisans; and he, Richelieu--the French
Title:  minister, the national minister--would be ruined.  The king,
Title:  even while obeying him like a child, hated him as a child
Title:  hates his master, and would abandon him to the personal
Title:  vengeance of Monsieur and the queen.  He would then be lost,
Title:  and France, perhaps, with him.  All this must be prepared
Title:  against.
Title:  
Title:  Courtiers, becoming every instant more numerous, succeeded
Title:  one another, day and night, in the little house of the
Title:  bridge of La Pierre, in which the cardinal had established
Title:  his residence.
Title:  
Title:  There were monks who wore the frock with such an ill grace
Title:  that it was easy to perceive they belonged to the church
Title:  militant; women a little inconvenienced by their costume as
Title:  pages and whose large trousers could not entirely conceal
Title:  their rounded forms; and peasants with blackened hands but
Title:  with fine limbs, savoring of the man of quality a league
Title:  off.
Title:  
Title:  There were also less agreeable visits--for two or three
Title:  times reports were spread that the cardinal had nearly been
Title:  assassinated.
Title:  
Title:  It is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it was
Title:  he himself who set these bungling assassins to work, in
Title:  order to have, if wanted, the right of using reprisals; but
Title:  we must not believe everything ministers say, nor everything
Title:  their enemies say.
Title:  
Title:  These attempts did not prevent the cardinal, to whom his
Title:  most inveterate detractors have never denied personal
Title:  bravery, from making nocturnal excursions, sometimes to
Title:  communicate to the Duc d'Angouleme important orders,
Title:  sometimes to confer with the king, and sometimes to have an
Title:  interview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see at
Title:  home.
Title:  
Title:  On their part the Musketeers, who had not much to do with
Title:  the siege, were not under very strict orders and led a
Title:  joyous life.  The was the more easy for our three companions
Title:  in particular; for being friends of M. de Treville, they
Title:  obtained from him special permission to be absent after the
Title:  closing of the camp.
Title:  
Title:  Now, one evening when d'Artagnan, who was in the trenches,
Title:  was not able to accompany them, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis,
Title:  mounted on their battle steeds, enveloped in their war
Title:  cloaks, with their hands upon their pistol butts, were
Title:  returning from a drinking place called the Red Dovecot,
Title:  which Athos had discovered two days before upon the route to
Title:  Jarrie, following the road which led to the camp and quite
Title:  on their guard, as we have stated, for fear of an ambuscade,
Title:  when, about a quarter of a league from the village of
Title:  Boisnau, they fancied they heard the sound of horses
Title:  approaching them.  They immediately all three halted, closed
Title:  in, and waited, occupying the middle of the road.  In an
Title:  instant, and as the moon broke from behind a cloud, they saw
Title:  at a turning of the road two horsemen who, on perceiving
Title:  them, stopped in their turn, appearing to deliberate whether
Title:  they should continue their route or go back.  The hesitation
Title:  created some suspicion in the three friends, and Athos,
Title:  advancing a few paces in front of the others, cried in a
Title:  firm voice, "Who goes there?"
Title:  
Title:  "Who goes there, yourselves?" replied one of the horsemen.
Title:  
Title:  "That is not an answer," replied Athos.  "Who goes there?
Title:  Answer, or we charge."
Title:  
Title:  "Beware of what you are about, gentlemen!" said a clear
Title:  voice which seemed accustomed to command.
Title:  
Title:  "It is some superior officer making his night rounds," said
Title:  Athos.  "What do you wish, gentlemen?"
Title:  
Title:  "Who are you?" said the same voice, in the same commanding
Title:  tone. "Answer in your turn, or you may repent of your
Title:  disobedience."
Title:  
Title:  "King's Musketeers," said Athos, more and more convinced
Title:  that he who interrogated them had the right to do so.
Title:  
Title:  "What company?"
Title:  
Title:  "Company of Treville."
Title:  
Title:  "Advance, and give an account of what you are doing here at
Title:  this hour."
Title:  
Title:  The three companions advanced rather humbly--for all were
Title:  now convinced that they had to do with someone more powerful
Title:  than themselves--leaving Athos the post of speaker.
Title:  
Title:  One of the two riders, he who had spoken second, was ten
Title:  paces in front of his companion.  Athos made a sign to
Title:  Porthos and Aramis also to remain in the rear, and advanced
Title:  alone.
Title:  
Title:  "Your pardon, my officer," said Athos; "but we were ignorant
Title:  with whom we had to do, and you may see that we were good
Title:  guard."
Title:  
Title:  "Your name?" said the officer, who covered a part of his
Title:  face with his cloak.
Title:  
Title:  "But yourself, monsieur," said Athos, who began to be
Title:  annoyed by this inquisition, "give me, I beg you, the proof
Title:  that you have the right to question me."
Title:  
Title:  "Your name?" repeated the cavalier a second time, letting
Title:  his cloak fall, and leaving his face uncovered.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur the Cardinal!" cried the stupefied Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "Your name?" cried his Eminence, for the third time.
Title:  
Title:  "Athos," said the Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal made a sign to his attendant, who drew near.
Title:  "These three Musketeers shall follow us," said he, in an
Title:  undertone.  "I am not willing it should be known I have left
Title:  the camp; and if they follow us we shall be certain they
Title:  will tell nobody."
Title:  
Title:  "We are gentlemen, monseigneur," said Athos; "require our
Title:  parole, and give yourself no uneasiness.  Thank God, we can
Title:  keep a secret."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageous
Title:  speaker.
Title:  
Title:  "You have a quick ear, Monsieur Athos," said the cardinal;
Title:  "but now listen to this.  It is not from mistrust that I
Title:  request you to follow me, but for my security.  Your
Title:  companions are no doubt Messieurs Porthos and Aramis."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, your Eminence," said Athos, while the two Musketeers
Title:  who had remained behind advanced hat in hand.
Title:  
Title:  "I know you, gentlemen," said the cardinal, "I know you.  I
Title:  know you are not quite my friends, and I am sorry you are
Title:  not so; but I know you are brave and loyal gentlemen, and
Title:  that confidence may be placed in you.  Monsieur Athos, do
Title:  me, then, the honor to accompany me; you and your two
Title:  friends, and then I shall have an escort to excite envy in
Title:  his Majesty, if we should meet him."
Title:  
Title:  The three Musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, upon my honor," said Athos, "your Eminence is right
Title:  in taking us with you; we have seen several ill-looking
Title:  faces on the road, and we have even had a quarrel at the Red
Title:  Dovecot with four of those faces."
Title:  
Title:  "A quarrel, and what for, gentlemen?" said the cardinal;
Title:  "you know I don't like quarrelers."
Title:  
Title:  "And that is the reason why I have the honor to inform your
Title:  Eminence of what has happened; for you might learn it from
Title:  others, and upon a false account believe us to be in fault."
Title:  
Title:  "What have been the results of your quarrel?" said the
Title:  cardinal, knitting his brow.
Title:  
Title:  "My friend, Aramis, here, has received a slight sword wound
Title:  in the arm, but not enough to prevent him, as your Eminence
Title:  may see, from mounting to the assault tomorrow, if your
Title:  Eminence orders an escalade."
Title:  
Title:  "But you are not the men to allow sword wounds to be
Title:  inflicted upon you thus," said the cardinal.  "Come, be
Title:  frank, gentlemen, you have settled accounts with somebody!
Title:  Confess; you know I have the right of giving absolution."
Title:  
Title:  "I, monseigneur?" said Athos.  "I did not even draw my
Title:  sword, but I took him who offended me round the body, and
Title:  threw him out of the window.  It appears that in falling,"
Title:  continued Athos, with some hesitation, "he broke his thigh."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said the cardinal; "and you, Monsieur Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "I, monseigneur, knowing that dueling is prohibited--I
Title:  seized a bench, and gave one of those brigands such a blow
Title:  that I believe his shoulder is broken."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well," said the cardinal; "and you, Monsieur Aramis?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur, being of a very mild disposition, and being,
Title:  likewise, of which Monseigneur perhaps is not aware, about
Title:  to enter into orders, I endeavored to appease my comrades,
Title:  when one of these wretches gave me a wound with a sword,
Title:  treacherously, across my left arm.  Then I admit my patience
Title:  failed me; I drew my sword in my turn, and as he came back
Title:  to the charge, I fancied I felt that in throwing himself
Title:  upon me, he let it pass through his body.  I only know for a
Title:  certainty that he fell; and it seemed to me that he was
Title:  borne away with his two companions."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil, gentlemen!" said the cardinal, "three men placed
Title:  hors de combat in a cabaret squabble!  You don't do your
Title:  work by halves.  And pray what was this quarrel about?"
Title:  
Title:  "These fellows were drunk," said Athos, "and knowing there
Title:  was a lady who had arrived at the cabaret this evening, they
Title:  wanted to force her door."
Title:  
Title:  "Force her door!" said the cardinal, "and for what purpose?"
Title:  
Title:  "To do her violence, without doubt," said Athos.  "I have
Title:  had the honor of informing your Eminence that these men were
Title:  drunk."
Title:  
Title:  "And was this lady young and handsome?" asked the cardinal,
Title:  with a certain degree of anxiety.
Title:  
Title:  "We did not see her, monseigneur," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "You did not see her?  Ah, very well," replied the cardinal,
Title:  quickly.  "You did well to defend the honor of a woman; and
Title:  as I am going to the Red Dovecot myself, I shall know if you
Title:  have told me the truth."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," said Athos, haughtily, "we are gentlemen, and
Title:  to save our heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood."
Title:  
Title:  "Therefore I do not doubt what you say, Monsieur Athos, I do
Title:  not doubt it for a single instant; but," added he, "to
Title:  change the conversation, was this lady alone?"
Title:  
Title:  "The lady had a cavalier shut up with her," said Athos, "but
Title:  as notwithstanding the noise, this cavalier did not show
Title:  himself, it is to be presumed that he is a coward."
Title:  
Title:  "'Judge not rashly', says the Gospel," replied the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  Athos bowed.
Title:  
Title:  "And now, gentlemen, that's well," continued the cardinal.
Title:  "I know what I wish to know; follow me."
Title:  
Title:  The three Musketeers passed behind his Eminence, who again
Title:  enveloped his face in his cloak, and put his horse in
Title:  motion, keeping from eight to ten paces in advance of his
Title:  four companions.
Title:  
Title:  They soon arrived at the silent, solitary inn.  No doubt the
Title:  host knew what illustrious visitor was expected, and had
Title:  consequently sent intruders out of the way.
Title:  
Title:  Ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to his
Title:  esquire and the three Musketeers to halt.  A saddled horse
Title:  was fastened to the window shutter.  The cardinal knocked
Title:  three times, and in a peculiar manner.
Title:  
Title:  A man, enveloped in a cloak, came out immediately, and
Title:  exchanged some rapid words with the cardinal; after which he
Title:  mounted his horse, and set off in the direction of Surgeres,
Title:  which was likewise the way to Paris.
Title:  
Title:  "Advance, gentlemen," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "You have told me the truth, my gentlemen," said he,
Title:  addressing the Musketeers, "and it will not be my fault if
Title:  our encounter this evening be not advantageous to you.  In
Title:  the meantime, follow me."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal alighted; the three Musketeers did likewise.
Title:  The cardinal threw the bridle of his horse to his esquire;
Title:  the three Musketeers fastened the horses to the shutters.
Title:  
Title:  The host stood at the door.  For him, the cardinal was only
Title:  an officer coming to visit a lady.
Title:  
Title:  "Have you any chamber on the ground floor where these
Title:  gentlemen can wait near a good fire?" said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  The host opened the door of a large room, in which an old
Title:  stove had just been replaced by a large and excellent
Title:  chimney.
Title:  
Title:  "I have this," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "That will do," replied the cardinal.  "Enter, gentlemen,
Title:  and be kind enough to wait for me; I shall not be more than
Title:  half an hour."
Title:  
Title:  And while the three Musketeers entered the ground floor
Title:  room, the cardinal, without asking further information,
Title:  ascended the staircase like a man who has no need of having
Title:  his road pointed out to him.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  44  THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES
Title:  
Title:  It was evident that without suspecting it, and actuated
Title:  solely by their chivalrous and adventurous character, our
Title:  three friends had just rendered a service to someone the
Title:  cardinal honored with his special protection.
Title:  
Title:  Now, who was that someone?  That was the question the three
Title:  Musketeers put to one another.  Then, seeing that none of
Title:  their replies could throw any light on the subject, Porthos
Title:  called the host and asked for dice.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis placed themselves at the table and began
Title:  to play.  Athos walked about in a contemplative mood.
Title:  
Title:  While thinking and walking, Athos passed and repassed before
Title:  the pipe of the stove, broken in halves, the other extremity
Title:  passing into the chamber above; and every time he passed and
Title:  repassed he heard a murmur of words, which at length fixed
Title:  his attention.  Athos went close to it, and distinguished
Title:  some words that appeared to merit so great an interest that
Title:  he made a sign to his friends to be silent, remaining
Title:  himself bent with his ear directed to the opening of the
Title:  lower orifice.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen, Milady," said the cardinal, "the affair is
Title:  important.  Sit down, and let us talk it over."
Title:  
Title:  "Milady!" murmured Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I listen to your Eminence with greatest attention," replied
Title:  a female voice which made the Musketeer start.
Title:  
Title:  "A small vessel with an English crew, whose captain is on my
Title:  side, awaits you at the mouth of Charente, at fort of the
Title:  Point.  He will set sail tomorrow morning."
Title:  
Title:  "I must go thither tonight?"
Title:  
Title:  "Instantly!  That is to say, when you have received my
Title:  instructions.  Two men, whom you will find at the door on
Title:  going out, will serve you as escort.  You will allow me to
Title:  leave first; then, after half an hour, you can go away in
Title:  your turn."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur.  Now let us return to the mission with
Title:  which you wish to charge me; and as I desire to continue to
Title:  merit the confidence of your Eminence, deign to unfold it to
Title:  me in terms clear and precise, that I may not commit an
Title:  error."
Title:  
Title:  There was an instant of profound silence between the two
Title:  interlocutors.  It was evident that the cardinal was
Title:  weighing beforehand the terms in which he was about to
Title:  speak, and that Milady was collecting all her intellectual
Title:  faculties to comprehend the things he was about to say, and
Title:  to engrave them in her memory when they should be spoken.
Title:  
Title:  Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two
Title:  companions to fasten the door inside, and to make them a
Title:  sign to come and listen with him.
Title:  
Title:  The two Musketeers, who loved their ease, brought a chair
Title:  for each of themselves and one for Athos.  All three then
Title:  sat down with their heads together and their ears on the
Title:  alert.
Title:  
Title:  "You will go to London," continued the cardinal.  "Arrived
Title:  in London, you will seek Buckingham."
Title:  
Title:  "I must beg your Eminence to observe," said Milady, "that
Title:  since the affair of the diamond studs, about which the duke
Title:  always suspected me, his Grace distrusts me."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, this time," said the cardinal, "it is not necessary
Title:  to steal his confidence, but to present yourself frankly and
Title:  loyally as a negotiator."
Title:  
Title:  "Frankly and loyally," repeated Milady, with an unspeakable
Title:  expression of duplicity.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, frankly and loyally," replied the cardinal, in the
Title:  same tone.  "All this negotiation must be carried on
Title:  openly."
Title:  
Title:  "I will follow your Eminence's instructions to the letter.
Title:  I only wait till you give them."
Title:  
Title:  "You will go to Buckingham in my behalf, and you will tell
Title:  him I am acquainted with all the preparations he has made;
Title:  but that they give me no uneasiness, since at the first step
Title:  he takes I will ruin the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "Will he believe that your Eminence is in a position to
Title:  accomplish the threat thus made?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; for I have the proofs."
Title:  
Title:  "I must be able to present these proofs for his
Title:  appreciation."
Title:  
Title:  "Without doubt.  And you will tell him I will publish the
Title:  report of Bois-Robert and the Marquis de Beautru, upon the
Title:  interview which the duke had at the residence of Madame the
Title:  Constable with the queen on the evening Madame the Constable
Title:  gave a masquerade.  You will tell him, in order that he may
Title:  not doubt, that he came there in the costume of the Great
Title:  Mogul, which the Chevalier de Guise was to have worn, and
Title:  that he purchased this exchange for the sum of three
Title:  thousand pistoles."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monseigneur?"
Title:  
Title:  "All the details of his coming into and going out of the
Title:  palace--on the night when he introduced himself in the
Title:  character of an Italian fortune teller--you will tell him,
Title:  that he may not doubt the correctness of my information;
Title:  that he had under his cloak a large white robe dotted with
Title:  black tears, death's heads, and crossbones--for in case of a
Title:  surprise, he was to pass for the phantom of the White Lady
Title:  who, as all the world knows, appears at the Louvre every
Title:  time any great event is impending."
Title:  
Title:  "Is that all, monseigneur?"
Title:  
Title:  "Tell him also that I am acquainted with all the details of
Title:  the adventure at Amiens; that I will have a little romance
Title:  made of it, wittily turned, with a plan of the garden and
Title:  portraits of the principal actors in that nocturnal
Title:  romance."
Title:  
Title:  "I will tell him that."
Title:  
Title:  "Tell him further that I hold Montague in my power; that
Title:  Montague is in the Bastille; that no letters were found upon
Title:  him, it is true, but that torture may make him tell much of
Title:  what he knows, and even what he does not know."
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly."
Title:  
Title:  "Then add that his Grace has, in the precipitation with
Title:  which he quit the Isle of Re, forgotten and left behind him
Title:  in his lodging a certain letter from Madame de Chevreuse
Title:  which singularly compromises the queen, inasmuch as it
Title:  proves not only that her Majesty can love the enemies of the
Title:  king but that she can conspire with the enemies of France.
Title:  You recollect perfectly all I have told you, do you not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Your Eminence will judge: the ball of Madame the Constable;
Title:  the night at the Louvre; the evening at Amiens; the arrest
Title:  of Montague; the letter of Madame de Chevreuse."
Title:  
Title:  "That's it," said the cardinal, "that's it.  You have an
Title:  excellent memory, Milady."
Title:  
Title:  "But," resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed this
Title:  flattering compliment, "if, in spite of all these reasons,
Title:  the duke does not give way and continues to menace France?"
Title:  
Title:  "The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly,"
Title:  replied Richelieu, with great bitterness.  "Like the ancient
Title:  paladins, he has only undertaken this war to obtain a look
Title:  from his lady love.  If he becomes certain that this war
Title:  will cost the honor, and perhaps the liberty, of the lady of
Title:  his thoughts, as he says, I will answer for it he will look
Title:  twice."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet," said Milady, with a persistence that proved she
Title:  wished to see clearly to the end of the mission with which
Title:  she was about to be charged, "if he persists?"
Title:  
Title:  "If he persists?" said the cardinal.  "That is not
Title:  probable."
Title:  
Title:  "It is possible," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "If he persists--" His Eminence made a pause, and resumed:
Title:  "If he persists--well, then I shall hope for one of those
Title:  events which change the destinies of states."
Title:  
Title:  "If your Eminence would quote to me some one of these events
Title:  in history," said Milady, "perhaps I should partake of your
Title:  confidence as to the future."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, here, for example," said Richelieu: "when, in 1610,
Title:  for a cause similar to that which moves the duke, King Henry
Title:  IV, of glorious memory, was about, at the same time, to
Title:  invade Flanders and Italy, in order to attack Austria on
Title:  both sides.  Well, did there not happen an event which saved
Title:  Austria?  Why should not the king of France have the same
Title:  chance as the emperor?"
Title:  
Title:  "Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Rue
Title:  de la Feronnerie?"
Title:  
Title:  "Precisely," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "Does not your Eminence fear that the punishment inflicted
Title:  upon Ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the idea
Title:  of imitating him?"
Title:  
Title:  "There will be, in all times and in all countries,
Title:  particularly if religious divisions exist in those
Title:  countries, fanatics who ask nothing better than to become
Title:  martyrs.  Ay, and observe--it just occurs to me that the
Title:  Puritans are furious against Buckingham, and their preachers
Title:  designate him as the Antichrist."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," continued the cardinal, in an indifferent tone, "the
Title:  only thing to be sought for at this moment is some woman,
Title:  handsome, young, and clever, who has cause of quarrel with
Title:  the duke.  The duke has had many affairs of gallantry; and
Title:  if he has fostered his amours by promises of eternal
Title:  constancy, he must likewise have sown the seeds of hatred by
Title:  his eternal infidelities."
Title:  
Title:  "No doubt," said Milady, coolly, "such a woman may be
Title:  found."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, such a woman, who would place the knife of Jacques
Title:  Clement or of Ravaillac in the hands of a fanatic, would
Title:  save France."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but she would then be the accomplice of an
Title:  assassination."
Title:  
Title:  "Were the accomplices of Ravaillac or of Jacques Clement
Title:  ever known?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; for perhaps they were too high-placed for anyone to
Title:  dare look for them where they were.  The Palace of Justice
Title:  would not be burned down for everybody, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "You think, then, that the fire at the Palace of Justice was
Title:  not caused by chance?" asked Richelieu, in the tone with
Title:  which he would have put a question of no importance.
Title:  
Title:  "I, monseigneur?" replied Milady.  "I think nothing; I quote
Title:  a fact, that is all.  Only I say that if I were named Madame
Title:  de Montpensier, or the Queen Marie de Medicis, I should use
Title:  less precautions than I take, being simply called Milady
Title:  Clarik."
Title:  
Title:  "That is just," said Richelieu.  "What do you require,
Title:  then?"
Title:  
Title:  "I require an order which would ratify beforehand all that I
Title:  should think proper to do for the greatest good of France."
Title:  
Title:  "But in the first place, this woman I have described must be
Title:  found who is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke."
Title:  
Title:  "She is found," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Then the miserable fanatic must be found who will serve as
Title:  an instrument of God's justice."
Title:  
Title:  "He will be found."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said the cardinal, "then it will be time to claim
Title:  the order which you just now required."
Title:  
Title:  "Your Eminence is right," replied Milady; "and I have been
Title:  wrong in seeing in the mission with which you honor me
Title:  anything but that which it really is--that is, to announce
Title:  to his Grace, on the part of your Eminence, that you are
Title:  acquainted with the different disguises by means of which he
Title:  succeeded in approaching the queen during the fete given by
Title:  Madame the Constable; that you have proofs of the interview
Title:  granted at the Louvre by the queen to a certain Italian
Title:  astrologer who was no other than the Duke of Buckingham;
Title:  that you have ordered a little romance of a satirical nature
Title:  to be written upon the adventures of Amiens, with a plan of
Title:  the gardens in which those adventures took place, and
Title:  portraits of the actors who figured in them; that Montague
Title:  is in the Bastille, and that the torture may make him say
Title:  things he remembers, and even things he has forgotten; that
Title:  you possess a certain letter from Madame de Chevreuse, found
Title:  in his Grace's lodging, which singularly compromises not
Title:  only her who wrote it, but her in whose name it was written.
Title:  Then, if he persists, notwithstanding all this--as that is,
Title:  as I have said, the limit of my mission--I shall have
Title:  nothing to do but to pray God to work a miracle for the
Title:  salvation of France.  That is it, is it not, monseigneur,
Title:  and I shall have nothing else to do?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is it," replied the cardinal, dryly.
Title:  
Title:  "And now," said Milady, without appearing to remark the
Title:  change of the duke's tone toward her--"now that I have
Title:  received the instructions of your Eminence as concerns your
Title:  enemies, Monseigneur will permit me to say a few words to
Title:  him of mine?"
Title:  
Title:  "Have you enemies, then?" asked Richelieu.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur, enemies against whom you owe me all your
Title:  support, for I made them by serving your Eminence."
Title:  
Title:  "Who are they?" replied the duke.
Title:  
Title:  "In the first place, there is a little intrigante named
Title:  Bonacieux."
Title:  
Title:  "She is in the prison of Nantes."
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say, she was there," replied Milady; "but the
Title:  queen has obtained an order from the king by means of which
Title:  she has been conveyed to a convent."
Title:  
Title:  "To a convent?" said the duke.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, to a convent."
Title:  
Title:  "And to which?"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know; the secret has been well kept."
Title:  
Title:  "But I will know!"
Title:  
Title:  "And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that woman
Title:  is?"
Title:  
Title:  "I can see nothing inconvenient in that," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me
Title:  than this little Madame Bonacieux."
Title:  
Title:  "Who is that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Her lover."
Title:  
Title:  "What is his name?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, your Eminence knows him well," cried Milady, carried
Title:  away by her anger.  "He is the evil genius of both of us.
Title:  It is he who in an encounter with your Eminence's Guards
Title:  decided the victory in favor of the king's Musketeers; it is
Title:  he who gave three desperate wounds to de Wardes, your
Title:  emissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs to
Title:  fail; it is he who, knowing it was I who had Madame
Title:  Bonacieux carried off, has sworn my death."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said the cardinal, "I know of whom you speak."
Title:  
Title:  "I mean that miserable d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "He is a bold fellow," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "And it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he is
Title:  the more to be feared."
Title:  
Title:  "I must have," said the duke, "a proof of his connection
Title:  with Buckingham."
Title:  
Title:  "A proof?" cried Milady; "I will have ten."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, it becomes the simplest thing in the world; get
Title:  me that proof, and I will send him to the Bastille."
Title:  
Title:  "So far good, monseigneur; but afterwards?"
Title:  
Title:  "When once in the Bastille, there is no afterward!" said the
Title:  cardinal, in a low voice.  "Ah, pardieu!" continued he, "if
Title:  it were as easy for me to get rid of my enemy as it is easy
Title:  to get rid of yours, and if it were against such people you
Title:  require impunity--"
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," replied Milady, "a fair exchange.  Life for
Title:  life, man for man; give me one, I will give you the other."
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know what you mean, nor do I even desire to know
Title:  what you mean," replied the cardinal; "but I wish to please
Title:  you, and see nothing out of the way in giving you what you
Title:  demand with respect to so infamous a creature--the more so
Title:  as you tell me this d'Artagnan is a libertine, a duelist,
Title:  and a traitor."
Title:  
Title:  "An infamous scoundrel, monseigneur, a scoundrel!"
Title:  
Title:  "Give me paper, a quill, and some ink, then," said the
Title:  cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "Here they are, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  There was a moment of silence, which proved that the
Title:  cardinal was employed in seeking the terms in which he
Title:  should write the note, or else in writing it.  Athos, who
Title:  had not lost a word of the conversation, took his two
Title:  companions by the hand, and led them to the other end of the
Title:  room.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Porthos, "what do you want, and why do you not
Title:  let us listen to the end of the conversation?"
Title:  
Title:  "Hush!" said Athos, speaking in a low voice.  "We have heard
Title:  all it was necessary we should hear; besides, I don't
Title:  prevent you from listening, but I must be gone."
Title:  
Title:  "You must be gone!" said Porthos; "and if the cardinal asks
Title:  for you, what answer can we make?"
Title:  
Title:  "You will not wait till he asks; you will speak first, and
Title:  tell him that I am gone on the lookout, because certain
Title:  expressions of our host have given me reason to think the
Title:  road is not safe.  I will say two words about it to the
Title:  cardinal's esquire likewise.  The rest concerns myself;
Title:  don't be uneasy about that."
Title:  
Title:  "Be prudent, Athos," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Be easy on that head," replied Athos; "you know I am cool
Title:  enough."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.
Title:  
Title:  As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took his
Title:  horse, which was tied with those of his friends to the
Title:  fastenings of the shutters, in four words convinced the
Title:  attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for their return,
Title:  carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew his
Title:  sword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  45  A CONJUGAL SCENE
Title:  
Title:  As Athos had foreseen, it was not long before the cardinal
Title:  came down.  He opened the door of the room in which the
Title:  Musketeers were, and found Porthos playing an earnest game
Title:  of dice with Aramis.  He cast a rapid glance around the
Title:  room, and perceived that one of his men was missing.
Title:  
Title:  "What has become of Monseigneur Athos?" asked he.
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," replied Porthos, "he has gone as a scout, on
Title:  account of some words of our host, which made him believe
Title:  the road was not safe."
Title:  
Title:  "And you, what have you done, Monsieur Porthos?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have won five pistoles of Aramis."
Title:  
Title:  "Well; now will you return with me?"
Title:  
Title:  "We are at your Eminence's orders."
Title:  
Title:  "To horse, then, gentlemen; for it is getting late."
Title:  
Title:  The attendant was at the door, holding the cardinal's horse
Title:  by the bridle.  At a short distance a group of two men and
Title:  three horses appeared in the shade.  These were the two men
Title:  who were to conduct Milady to the fort of the Point, and
Title:  superintend her embarkation.
Title:  
Title:  The attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the two
Title:  Musketeers had already said with respect to Athos.  The
Title:  cardinal made an approving gesture, and retraced his route
Title:  with the same precautions he had used incoming.
Title:  
Title:  Let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected by
Title:  his esquire and the two Musketeers, and return to Athos.
Title:  
Title:  For a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which he
Title:  started; but when out of sight he turned his horse to the
Title:  right, made a circuit, and came back within twenty paces of
Title:  a high hedge to watch the passage of the little troop.
Title:  Having recognized the laced hats of his companions and the
Title:  golden fringe of the cardinal's cloak, he waited till the
Title:  horsemen had turned the angle of the road, and having lost
Title:  sight of them, he returned at a gallop to the inn, which was
Title:  opened to him without hesitation.
Title:  
Title:  The host recognized him.
Title:  
Title:  "My officer," said Athos, "has forgotten to give a piece of
Title:  very important information to the lady, and has sent me back
Title:  to repair his forgetfulness."
Title:  
Title:  "Go up," said the host; "she is still in her chamber."
Title:  
Title:  Athos availed himself of the permission, ascended the stairs
Title:  with his lightest step, gained the landing, and through the
Title:  open door perceived Milady putting on her hat.
Title:  
Title:  He entered the chamber and closed the door behind him.  At
Title:  the noise he made in pushing the bolt, Milady turned round.
Title:  
Title:  Athos was standing before the door, enveloped in his cloak,
Title:  with his hat pulled down over his eyes.  On seeing this
Title:  figure, mute and immovable as a statue, Milady was
Title:  frightened.
Title:  
Title:  "Who are you, and what do you want?" cried she.
Title:  
Title:  "Humph," murmured Athos, "it is certainly she!"
Title:  
Title:  And letting fall his cloak and raising his hat, he advanced
Title:  toward Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know me, madame?" said he.
Title:  
Title:  Milady made one step forward, and then drew back as if she
Title:  had seen a serpent.
Title:  
Title:  "So far, well," said Athos, "I perceive you know me."
Title:  
Title:  "The Comte de la Fere!" murmured Milady, becoming
Title:  exceedingly pale, and drawing back till the wall prevented
Title:  her from going any farther.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, Milady," replied Athos; "the Comte de la Fere in
Title:  person, who comes expressly from the other world to have the
Title:  pleasure of paying you a visit.  Sit down, madame, and let
Title:  us talk, as the cardinal said."
Title:  
Title:  Milady, under the influence of inexpressible terror, sat
Title:  down without uttering a word.
Title:  
Title:  "You certainly are a demon sent upon the earth!" said Athos.
Title:  "Your power is great, I know; but you also know that with
Title:  the help of God men have often conquered the most terrible
Title:  demons.  You have once before thrown yourself in my path.  I
Title:  thought I had crushed you, madame; but either I was deceived
Title:  or hell has resuscitated you!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady at these words, which recalled frightful
Title:  remembrances, hung down her head with a suppressed groan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, hell has resuscitated you," continued Athos.  "Hell
Title:  has made you rich, hell has given you another name, hell has
Title:  almost made you another face; but it has neither effaced the
Title:  stains from your soul nor the brand from your body."
Title:  
Title:  Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyes
Title:  flashed lightning.  Athos remained sitting.
Title:  
Title:  "You believed me to be dead, did you not, as I believed you
Title:  to be?  And the name of Athos as well concealed the Comte de
Title:  la Fere, as the name Milady Clarik concealed Anne de Breuil.
Title:  Was it not so you were called when your honored brother
Title:  married us?  Our position is truly a strange one," continued
Title:  Athos, laughing.  "We have only lived up to the present time
Title:  because we believed each other dead, and because a
Title:  remembrance is less oppressive than a living creature,
Title:  though a remembrance is sometimes devouring."
Title:  
Title:  "But," said Milady, in a hollow, faint voice, "what brings
Title:  you back to me, and what do you want with me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your
Title:  eyes, I have not lost sight of you."
Title:  
Title:  "You know what I have done?"
Title:  
Title:  "I can relate to you, day by day, your actions from your
Title:  entrance to the service of the cardinal to this evening."
Title:  
Title:  A smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen!  It was you who cut off the two diamond studs from
Title:  the shoulder of the Duke of Buckingham; it was you had the
Title:  Madame Bonacieux carried off; it was you who, in love with
Title:  de Wardes and thinking to pass the night with him, opened
Title:  the door to Monsieur d'Artagnan; it was you who, believing
Title:  that de Wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killed
Title:  by his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered
Title:  your infamous secret, wished to have him killed in his turn
Title:  by two assassins, whom you sent in pursuit of him; it was
Title:  you who, finding the balls had missed their mark, sent
Title:  poisoned wine with a forged letter, to make your victim
Title:  believe that the wine came from his friends.  In short, it
Title:  was you who have but now in this chamber, seated in this
Title:  chair I now fill, made an engagement with Cardinal Richelieu
Title:  to cause the Duke of Buckingham to be assassinated, in
Title:  exchange for the promise he has made you to allow you to
Title:  assassinate d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  Milady was livid.
Title:  
Title:  "You must be Satan!" cried she.
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps," said Athos; "But at all events listen well to
Title:  this.  Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him to
Title:  be assassinated--I care very little about that!  I don't
Title:  know him.  Besides, he is an Englishman.  But do not touch
Title:  with the tip of your finger a single hair of d'Artagnan, who
Title:  is a faithful friend whom I love and defend, or I swear to
Title:  you by the head of my father the crime which you shall have
Title:  endeavored to commit, or shall have committed, shall be the
Title:  last."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur d'Artagnan has cruelly insulted me," said Milady,
Title:  in a hollow tone; "Monsieur d'Artagnan shall die!"
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!  Is it possible to insult you, madame?" said Athos,
Title:  laughing; "he has insulted you, and he shall die!"
Title:  
Title:  "He shall die!" replied Milady; "she first, and he
Title:  afterward."
Title:  
Title:  Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo.  The sight of this
Title:  creature, who had nothing of the woman about her, recalled
Title:  awful remembrances.  He thought how one day, in a less
Title:  dangerous situation than the one in which he was now placed,
Title:  he had already endeavored to sacrifice her to his honor.
Title:  His desire for blood returned, burning his brain and
Title:  pervading his frame like a raging fever; he arose in his
Title:  turn, reached his hand to his belt, drew forth a pistol, and
Title:  cocked it.
Title:  
Title:  Milady, pale as a corpse, endeavored to cry out; but her
Title:  swollen tongue could utter no more than a hoarse sound which
Title:  had nothing human in it and resembled the rattle of a wild
Title:  beast.  Motionless against the dark tapestry, with her hair
Title:  in disorder, she appeared like a horrid image of terror.
Title:  
Title:  Athos slowly raised his pistol, stretched out his arm so
Title:  that the weapon almost touched Milady's forehead, and then,
Title:  in a voice the more terrible from having the supreme
Title:  calmness of a fixed resolution, "Madame," said he, "you will
Title:  this instant deliver to me the paper the cardinal signed; or
Title:  upon my soul, I will blow your brains out."
Title:  
Title:  With another man, Milady might have preserved some doubt;
Title:  but she knew Athos.  Nevertheless, she remained motionless.
Title:  
Title:  "You have one second to decide," said he.
Title:  
Title:  Milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that the
Title:  trigger was about to be pulled; she reached her hand quickly
Title:  to her bosom, drew out a paper, and held it toward Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Take it," said she, "and be accursed!"
Title:  
Title:  Athos took the paper, returned the pistol to his belt,
Title:  approached the lamp to be assured that it was the paper,
Title:  unfolded it, and read:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Dec. 3, 1627
Title:  
Title:  It is by my order and for the good of the state that the
Title:  bearer of this has done what he has done.
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "And now," said Athos, resuming his cloak and putting on his
Title:  hat, "now that I have drawn your teeth, viper, bite if you
Title:  can."
Title:  
Title:  And he left the chamber without once looking behind him.
Title:  
Title:  At the door he found the two men and the spare horse which
Title:  they held.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said he, "Monseigneur's order is, you know, to
Title:  conduct that woman, without losing time, to the fort of the
Title:  Point, and never to leave her till she is on board."
Title:  
Title:  As these words agreed wholly with the order they had
Title:  received, they bowed their heads in sign of assent.
Title:  
Title:  With regard to Athos, he leaped lightly into the saddle and
Title:  set out at full gallop; only instead of following the road,
Title:  he went across the fields, urging his horse to the utmost
Title:  and stopping occasionally to listen.
Title:  
Title:  In one of those halts he heard the steps of several horses
Title:  on the road.  He had no doubt it was the cardinal and his
Title:  escort.  He immediately made a new point in advance, rubbed
Title:  his horse down with some heath and leaves of trees, and
Title:  placed himself across the road, about two hundred paces from
Title:  the camp.
Title:  
Title:  "Who goes there?" cried he, as soon as he perceived the
Title:  horsemen.
Title:  
Title:  "That is our brave Musketeer, I think," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur," said Porthos, "it is he."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur Athos," said Richelieu, "receive my thanks for the
Title:  good guard you have kept.  Gentlemen, we are arrived; take
Title:  the gate on the left.  The watchword is, 'King and Re.'"
Title:  
Title:  Saying these words, the cardinal saluted the three friends
Title:  with an inclination of his head, and took the right hand,
Title:  followed by his attendant--for that night he himself slept
Title:  in the camp.
Title:  
Title:  "Well!" said Porthos and Aramis together, as soon as the
Title:  cardinal was out of hearing, "well, he signed the paper she
Title:  required!"
Title:  
Title:  "I know it," said Athos, coolly, "since here it is."
Title:  
Title:  And the three friends did not exchange another word till
Title:  they reached their quarters, except to give the watchword to
Title:  the sentinels.  Only they sent Mousqueton to tell Planchet
Title:  that his master was requested, the instant that he left the
Title:  trenches, to come to the quarters of the Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  Milady, as Athos had foreseen, on finding the two men that
Title:  awaited her, made no difficulty in following them.  She had
Title:  had for an instant an inclination to be reconducted to the
Title:  cardinal, and relate everything to him; but a revelation on
Title:  her part would bring about a revelation on the part of
Title:  Athos.  She might say that Athos had hanged her; but then
Title:  Athos would tell that she was branded.  She thought it was
Title:  best to preserve silence, to discreetly set off to
Title:  accomplish her difficult mission with her usual skill; and
Title:  then, all things being accomplished to the satisfaction of
Title:  the cardinal, to come to him and claim her vengeance.
Title:  
Title:  In consequence, after having traveled all night, at seven
Title:  o'clock she was at the fort of the Point; at eight o'clock
Title:  she had embarked; and at nine, the vessel, which with
Title:  letters of marque from the cardinal was supposed to be
Title:  sailing for Bayonne, raised anchor, and steered its course
Title:  toward England.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  46  THE BASTION SAINT-GERVAIS
Title:  
Title:  On arriving at the lodgings of his three friends, d'Artagnan
Title:  found them assembled in the same chamber.  Athos was
Title:  meditating; Porthos was twisting his mustache; Aramis was
Title:  saying his prayers in a charming little Book of Hours, bound
Title:  in blue velvet.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardieu, gentlemen," said he.  "I hope what you have to
Title:  tell me is worth the trouble, or else, I warn you, I will
Title:  not pardon you for making me come here instead of getting a
Title:  little rest after a night spent in taking and dismantling a
Title:  bastion.  Ah, why were you not there, gentlemen?  It was
Title:  warm work."
Title:  
Title:  "We were in a place where it was not very cold," replied
Title:  Porthos, giving his mustache a twist which was peculiar to
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  "Hush!" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, oh!" said d'Artagnan, comprehending the slight frown of
Title:  the Musketeer.  "It appears there is something fresh
Title:  aboard."
Title:  
Title:  "Aramis," said Athos, "you went to breakfast the day before
Title:  yesterday at the inn of the Parpaillot, I believe?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "How did you fare?"
Title:  
Title:  "For my part, I ate but little.  The day before yesterday
Title:  was a fish day, and they had nothing but meat."
Title:  
Title:  "What," said Athos, "no fish at a seaport?"
Title:  
Title:  "They say," said Aramis, resuming his pious reading, "that
Title:  the dyke which the cardinal is making drives them all out
Title:  into the open sea."
Title:  
Title:  "But that is not quite what I mean to ask you, Aramis,"
Title:  replied Athos.  "I want to know if you were left alone, and
Title:  nobody interrupted you."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, I think there were not many intruders.  Yes, Athos, I
Title:  know what you mean: we shall do very well at the
Title:  Parpaillot."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us go to the Parpaillot, then, for here the walls are
Title:  like sheets of paper."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, who was accustomed to his friend's manner of
Title:  acting, and who perceived immediately, by a word, a gesture,
Title:  or a sign from him, that the circumstances were serious,
Title:  took Athos's arm, and went out without saying anything.
Title:  Porthos followed, chatting with Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  On their way they met Grimaud.  Athos made him a sign to
Title:  come with them.  Grimaud, according to custom, obeyed in
Title:  silence; the poor lad had nearly come to the pass of
Title:  forgetting how to speak.
Title:  
Title:  They arrived at the drinking room of the Parpaillot.  It was
Title:  seven o'clock in the morning, and daylight began to appear.
Title:  The three friends ordered breakfast, and went into a room in
Title:  which the host said they would not be disturbed.
Title:  
Title:  Unfortunately, the hour was badly chosen for a private
Title:  conference.  The morning drum had just been beaten; everyone
Title:  shook off the drowsiness of night, and to dispel the humid
Title:  morning air, came to take a drop at the inn.  Dragoons,
Title:  Swiss, Guardsmen, Musketeers, light-horsemen, succeeded one
Title:  another with a rapidity which might answer the purpose of
Title:  the host very well, but agreed badly with the views of the
Title:  four friends.  Thus they applied very curtly to the
Title:  salutations, healths, and jokes of their companions.
Title:  
Title:  "I see how it will be," said Athos: "we shall get into some
Title:  pretty quarrel or other, and we have no need of one just
Title:  now.  D'Artagnan, tell us what sort of a night you have had,
Title:  and we will describe ours afterward."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, yes," said a light-horseman, with a glass of brandy in
Title:  his hand, which he sipped slowly.  "I hear you gentlemen of
Title:  the Guards have been in the trenches tonight, and that you
Title:  did not get much the best of the Rochellais."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan looked at Athos to know if he ought to reply to
Title:  this intruder who thus mixed unasked in their conversation.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Athos, "don't you hear Monsieur de Busigny, who
Title:  does you the honor to ask you a question?  Relate what has
Title:  passed during the night, since these gentlemen desire to
Title:  know it."
Title:  
Title:  "Have you not taken a bastion?" said a Swiss, who was
Title:  drinking rum out of beer glass.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monsieur," said d'Artagnan, bowing, "we have had that
Title:  honor.  We even have, as you may have heard, introduced a
Title:  barrel of powder under one of the angles, which in blowing
Title:  up made a very pretty breach.  Without reckoning that as the
Title:  bastion was not built yesterday all the rest of the building
Title:  was badly shaken."
Title:  
Title:  "And what bastion is it?" asked a dragoon, with his saber
Title:  run through a goose which he was taking to be cooked.
Title:  
Title:  "The bastion St. Gervais," replied d'Artagnan, "from behind
Title:  which the Rochellais annoyed our workmen."
Title:  
Title:  "Was that affair hot?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, moderately so.  We lost five men, and the Rochellais
Title:  eight or ten."
Title:  
Title:  "Balzempleu!" said the Swiss, who, notwithstanding the
Title:  admirable collection of oaths possessed by the German
Title:  language, had acquired a habit of swearing in French.
Title:  
Title:  "But it is probable," said the light-horseman, "that they
Title:  will send pioneers this morning to repair the bastion."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that's probable," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Athos, "a wager!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, wooi, a vager!" cried the Swiss.
Title:  
Title:  "What is it?" said the light-horseman.
Title:  
Title:  "Stop a bit," said the dragoon, placing his saber like a
Title:  spit upon the two large iron dogs which held the firebrands
Title:  in the chimney, "stop a bit, I am in it.  You cursed host! a
Title:  dripping pan immediately, that I may not lose a drop of the
Title:  fat of this estimable bird."
Title:  
Title:  "You was right," said the Swiss; "goose grease is kood with
Title:  basdry."
Title:  
Title:  "There!" said the dragoon.  "Now for the wager!  We listen,
Title:  Monsieur Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, the wager!" said the light-horseman.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, Monsieur de Busigny, I will bet you," said Athos,
Title:  "that my three companions, Messieurs Porthos, Aramis, and
Title:  d'Artagnan, and myself, will go and breakfast in the bastion
Title:  St. Gervais, and we will remain there an hour, by the watch,
Title:  whatever the enemy may do to dislodge us."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis looked at each other; they began to
Title:  comprehend.
Title:  
Title:  "But," said d'Artagnan, in the ear of Athos, "you are going
Title:  to get us all killed without mercy."
Title:  
Title:  "We are much more likely to be killed," said Athos, "if we
Title:  do not go."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, gentlemen," said Porthos, turning round upon his
Title:  chair and twisting his mustache, "that's a fair bet, I
Title:  hope."
Title:  
Title:  "I take it," said M. de Busigny; "so let us fix the stake."
Title:  
Title:  "You are four gentlemen," said Athos, "and we are four; an
Title:  unlimited dinner for eight.  Will that do?"
Title:  
Title:  "Capitally," replied M. de Busigny.
Title:  
Title:  "Perfectly," said the dragoon.
Title:  
Title:  "That shoots me," said the Swiss.
Title:  
Title:  The fourth auditor, who during all this conversation had
Title:  played a mute part, made a sign of the head in proof that he
Title:  acquiesced in the proposition.
Title:  
Title:  "The breakfast for these gentlemen is ready," said the host.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, bring it," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  The host obeyed.  Athos called Grimaud, pointed to a large
Title:  basket which lay in a corner, and made a sign to him to wrap
Title:  the viands up in the napkins.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud understood that it was to be a breakfast on the
Title:  grass, took the basket, packed up the viands, added the
Title:  bottles, and then took the basket on his arm.
Title:  
Title:  "But where are you going to eat my breakfast?" asked the
Title:  host.
Title:  
Title:  "What matter, if you are paid for it?" said Athos, and he
Title:  threw two pistoles majestically on the table.
Title:  
Title:  "Shall I give you the change, my officer?" said the host.
Title:  
Title:  "No, only add two bottles of champagne, and the difference
Title:  will be for the napkins."
Title:  
Title:  The host had not quite so good a bargain as he at first
Title:  hoped for, but he made amends by slipping in two bottles of
Title:  Anjou wine instead of two bottles of champagne.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur de Busigny," said Athos, "will you be so kind as
Title:  to set your watch with mine, or permit me to regulate mine
Title:  by yours?"
Title:  
Title:  "Which you please, monsieur!" said the light-horseman,
Title:  drawing from his fob a very handsome watch, studded with
Title:  diamonds; "half past seven."
Title:  
Title:  "Thirty-five minutes after seven," said Athos, "by which you
Title:  perceive I am five minutes faster than you."
Title:  
Title:  And bowing to all the astonished persons present, the young
Title:  men took the road to the bastion St. Gervais, followed by
Title:  Grimaud, who carried the basket, ignorant of where he was
Title:  going but in the passive obedience which Athos had taught
Title:  him not even thinking of asking.
Title:  
Title:  As long as they were within the circle of the camp, the four
Title:  friends did not exchange one word; besides, they were
Title:  followed by the curious, who, hearing of the wager, were
Title:  anxious to know how they would come out of it.  But when
Title:  once they passed the line of circumvallation and found
Title:  themselves in the open plain, d'Artagnan, who was completely
Title:  ignorant of what was going forward, thought it was time to
Title:  demand an explanation.
Title:  
Title:  "And now, my dear Athos," said he, "do me the kindness to
Title:  tell me where we are going?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, you see plainly enough we are going to the bastion."
Title:  
Title:  "But what are we going to do there?"
Title:  
Title:  "You know well that we go to breakfast there."
Title:  
Title:  "But why did we not breakfast at the Parpaillot?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because we have very important matters to communicate to
Title:  one another, and it was impossible to talk five minutes in
Title:  that inn without being annoyed by all those importunate
Title:  fellows, who keep coming in, saluting you, and addressing
Title:  you.  Here at least," said Athos, pointing to the bastion,
Title:  "they will not come and disturb us."
Title:  
Title:  "It appears to me," said d'Artagnan, with that prudence
Title:  which allied itself in him so naturally with excessive
Title:  bravery, "that we could have found some retired place on the
Title:  downs or the seashore."
Title:  
Title:  "Where we should have been seen all four conferring
Title:  together, so that at the end of a quarter of an hour the
Title:  cardinal would have been informed by his spies that we were
Title:  holding a council."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Aramis, "Athos is right: ANIMADVERTUNTUR IN
Title:  DESERTIS."
Title:  
Title:  "A desert would not have been amiss," said Porthos; "but it
Title:  behooved us to find it."
Title:  
Title:  "There is no desert where a bird cannot pass over one's
Title:  head, where a fish cannot leap out of the water, where a
Title:  rabbit cannot come out of its burrow, and I believe that
Title:  bird, fish, and rabbit each becomes a spy of the cardinal.
Title:  Better, then, pursue our enterprise; from which, besides, we
Title:  cannot retreat without shame.  We have made a wager--a wager
Title:  which could not have been foreseen, and of which I defy
Title:  anyone to divine the true cause.  We are going, in order to
Title:  win it, to remain an hour in the bastion.  Either we shall
Title:  be attacked, or not.  If we are not, we shall have all the
Title:  time to talk, and nobody will hear us--for I guarantee the
Title:  walls of the bastion have no ears; if we are, we will talk
Title:  of our affairs just the same.  Moreover, in defending
Title:  ourselves, we shall cover ourselves with glory.  You see
Title:  that everything is to our advantage."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said d'Artagnan; "but we shall indubitably attract a
Title:  ball."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, my dear," replied Athos, "you know well that the
Title:  balls most to be dreaded are not from the enemy."
Title:  
Title:  "But for such an expedition we surely ought to have brought
Title:  our muskets."
Title:  
Title:  "You are stupid, friend Porthos.  Why should we load
Title:  ourselves with a useless burden?"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't find a good musket, twelve cartridges, and a powder
Title:  flask very useless in the face of an enemy."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," replied Athos, "have you not heard what d'Artagnan
Title:  said?"
Title:  
Title:  "What did he say?" demanded Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan said that in the attack of last night eight or
Title:  ten Frenchmen were killed, and as many Rochellais."
Title:  
Title:  "What then?"
Title:  
Title:  "The bodies were not plundered, were they?  It appears the
Title:  conquerors had something else to do."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, we shall find their muskets, their cartridges, and
Title:  their flasks; and instead of four musketoons and twelve
Title:  balls, we shall have fifteen guns and a hundred charges to
Title:  fire."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, Athos!" said Aramis, "truly you are a great man."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos nodded in sign of agreement.  D'Artagnan alone did
Title:  not seem convinced.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud no doubt shared the misgivings of the young man, for
Title:  seeing that they continued to advance toward the
Title:  bastion--something he had till then doubted--he pulled his
Title:  master by the skirt of his coat.
Title:  
Title:  "Where are we going?" asked he, by a gesture.
Title:  
Title:  Athos pointed to the bastion.
Title:  
Title:  "But," said Grimaud, in the same silent dialect, "we shall
Title:  leave our skins there."
Title:  
Title:  Athos raised his eyes and his finger toward heaven.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud put his basket on the ground and sat down with a
Title:  shake of the head.
Title:  
Title:  Athos took a pistol from his belt, looked to see if it was
Title:  properly primed, cocked it, and placed the muzzle close to
Title:  Grimaud's ear.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud was on his legs again as if by a spring.  Athos then
Title:  made him a sign to take up his basket and to walk on first.
Title:  Grimaud obeyed.  All that Grimaud gained by this momentary
Title:  pantomime was to pass from the rear guard to the vanguard.
Title:  
Title:  Arrived at the bastion, the four friends turned round.
Title:  
Title:  More than three hundred soldiers of all kinds were assembled
Title:  at the gate of the camp; and in a separate group might be
Title:  distinguished M. de Busigny, the dragoon, the Swiss, and the
Title:  fourth bettor.
Title:  
Title:  Athos took off his hat, placed it on the end of his sword,
Title:  and waved it in the air.
Title:  
Title:  All the spectators returned him his salute, accompanying
Title:  this courtesy with a loud hurrah which was audible to the
Title:  four; after which all four disappeared in the bastion,
Title:  whither Grimaud had preceded them.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  47  THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS
Title:  
Title:  As Athos had foreseen, the bastion was only occupied by a
Title:  dozen corpses, French and Rochellais.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Athos, who had assumed the command of the
Title:  expedition, "while Grimaud spreads the table, let us begin
Title:  by collecting the guns and cartridges together.  We can talk
Title:  while performing that necessary task.  These gentlemen,"
Title:  added he, pointing to the bodies, "cannot hear us."
Title:  
Title:  "But we could throw them into the ditch," said Porthos,
Title:  "after having assured ourselves they have nothing in their
Title:  pockets."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Athos, "that's Grimaud's business."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then," cried d'Artagnan, "pray let Grimaud search
Title:  them and throw them over the walls."
Title:  
Title:  "Heaven forfend!" said Athos; "they may serve us."
Title:  
Title:  "These bodies serve us?" said Porthos.  "You are mad, dear
Title:  friend."
Title:  
Title:  "Judge not rashly, say the gospel and the cardinal," replied
Title:  Athos. "How many guns, gentlemen?"
Title:  
Title:  "Twelve," replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "How many shots?"
Title:  
Title:  "A hundred."
Title:  
Title:  "That's quite as many as we shall want.  Let us load the
Title:  guns."
Title:  
Title:  The four Musketeers went to work; and as they were loading
Title:  the last musket Grimaud announced that the breakfast was
Title:  ready.
Title:  
Title:  Athos replied, always by gestures, that that was well, and
Title:  indicated to Grimaud, by pointing to a turret that resembled
Title:  a pepper caster, that he was to stand as sentinel.  Only, to
Title:  alleviate the tediousness of the duty, Athos allowed him to
Title:  take a loaf, two cutlets, and a bottle of wine.
Title:  
Title:  "And now to table," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  The four friends seated themselves on the ground with their
Title:  legs crossed like Turks, or even tailors.
Title:  
Title:  "And now," said d'Artagnan, "as there is no longer any fear
Title:  of being overheard, I hope you are going to let me into your
Title:  secret."
Title:  
Title:  "I hope at the same time to procure you amusement and glory,
Title:  gentlemen," said Athos.  "I have induced you to take a
Title:  charming promenade; here is a delicious breakfast; and
Title:  yonder are five hundred persons, as you may see through the
Title:  loopholes, taking us for heroes or madmen--two classes of
Title:  imbeciles greatly resembling each other."
Title:  
Title:  "But the secret!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "The secret is," said Athos, "that I saw Milady last night."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was lifting a glass to his lips; but at the name
Title:  of Milady, his hand trembled so, that he was obliged to put
Title:  the glass on the ground again for fear of spilling the
Title:  contents."
Title:  
Title:  "You saw your wi--"
Title:  
Title:  "Hush!" interrupted Athos.  "You forget, my dear, you forget
Title:  that these gentlemen are not initiated into my family
Title:  affairs like yourself.  I have seen Milady."
Title:  
Title:  "Where?" demanded d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Within two leagues of this place, at the inn of the Red
Title:  Dovecot."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case I am lost," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Not so bad yet," replied Athos; "for by this time she must
Title:  have quit the shores of France."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan breathed again.
Title:  
Title:  "But after all," asked Porthos, "who is Milady?"
Title:  
Title:  "A charming woman!" said Athos, sipping a glass of sparkling
Title:  wine.  "Villainous host!" cried he, "he has given us Anjou
Title:  wine instead of champagne, and fancies we know no better!
Title:  Yes," continued he, "a charming woman, who entertained kind
Title:  views toward our friend d'Artagnan, who, on his part, has
Title:  given her some offense for which she tried to revenge
Title:  herself a month ago by having him killed by two musket
Title:  shots, a week ago by trying to poison him, and yesterday by
Title:  demanding his head of the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "What! by demanding my head of the cardinal?" cried
Title:  d'Artagnan, pale with terror.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that is true as the Gospel," said Porthos; "I heard
Title:  her with my own ears."
Title:  
Title:  "I also," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said d'Artagnan, letting his arm fall with
Title:  discouragement, "it is useless to struggle longer.  I may as
Title:  well blow my brains out, and all will be over."
Title:  
Title:  "That's the last folly to be committed," said Athos, "seeing
Title:  it is the only one for which there is no remedy."
Title:  
Title:  "But I can never escape," said d'Artagnan, "with such
Title:  enemies.  First, my stranger of Meung; then de Wardes, to
Title:  whom I have given three sword wounds; next Milady, whose
Title:  secret I have discovered; finally, the cardinal, whose
Title:  vengeance I have balked."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Athos, "that only makes four; and we are
Title:  four--one for one.  Pardieu! if we may believe the signs
Title:  Grimaud is making, we are about to have to do with a very
Title:  different number of people.  What is it, Grimaud?
Title:  Considering the gravity of the occasion, I permit you to
Title:  speak, my friend; but be laconic, I beg.  What do you see?"
Title:  
Title:  "A troop."
Title:  
Title:  "Of how many persons?"
Title:  
Title:  "Twenty men."
Title:  
Title:  "What sort of men?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sixteen pioneers, four soldiers."
Title:  
Title:  "How far distant?"
Title:  
Title:  "Five hundred paces."
Title:  
Title:  "Good!  We have just time to finish this fowl and to drink
Title:  one glass of wine to your health, d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "To your health!" repeated Porthos and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, to my health! although I am very much afraid
Title:  that your good wishes will not be of great service to me."
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!" said Athos, "God is great, as say the followers of
Title:  Mohammed, and the future is in his hands."
Title:  
Title:  Then, swallowing the contents of his glass, which he put
Title:  down close to him, Athos arose carelessly, took the musket
Title:  next to him, and drew near to one of the loopholes.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos, Aramis and d'Artagnan followed his example.  As to
Title:  Grimaud, he received orders to place himself behind the four
Title:  friends in order to reload their weapons.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardieu!" said Athos, "it was hardly worth while to
Title:  distribute ourselves for twenty fellows armed with pickaxes,
Title:  mattocks, and shovels.  Grimaud had only to make them a sign
Title:  to go away, and I am convinced they would have left us in
Title:  peace."
Title:  
Title:  "I doubt that," replied d'Artagnan, "for they are advancing
Title:  very resolutely.  Besides, in addition to the pioneers,
Title:  there are four soldiers and a brigadier, armed with
Title:  muskets."
Title:  
Title:  "That's because they don't see us," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith," said Aramis, "I must confess I feel a great
Title:  repugnance to fire on these poor devils of civilians."
Title:  
Title:  "He is a bad priest," said Porthos, "who has pity for
Title:  heretics."
Title:  
Title:  "In truth," said Athos, "Aramis is right.  I will warn
Title:  them."
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil are you going to do?" cried d'Artagnan, "you
Title:  will be shot."
Title:  
Title:  But Athos heeded not his advice.  Mounting on the breach,
Title:  with his musket in one hand and his hat in the other, he
Title:  said, bowing courteously and addressing the soldiers and the
Title:  pioneers, who, astonished at this apparition, stopped fifty
Title:  paces from the bastion:  "Gentlemen, a few friends and
Title:  myself are about to breakfast in this bastion.  Now, you
Title:  know nothing is more disagreeable than being disturbed when
Title:  one is at breakfast.  We request you, then, if you really
Title:  have business here, to wait till we have finished or repast,
Title:  or to come again a short time hence, unless; unless, which
Title:  would be far better, you form the salutary resolution to
Title:  quit the side of the rebels, and come and drink with us to
Title:  the health of the King of France."
Title:  
Title:  "Take care, Athos!" cried d'Artagnan; "don't you see they
Title:  are aiming?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," said Athos; "but they are only civilians--very
Title:  bad marksmen, who will be sure not to hit me."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, at the same instant four shots were fired, and the
Title:  balls were flattened against the wall around Athos, but not
Title:  one touched him.
Title:  
Title:  Four shots replied to them almost instantaneously, but much
Title:  better aimed than those of the aggressors; three soldiers
Title:  fell dead, and one of the pioneers was wounded.
Title:  
Title:  "Grimaud," said Athos, still on the breach, "another
Title:  musket!"
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud immediately obeyed.  On their part, the three
Title:  friends had reloaded their arms; a second discharge followed
Title:  the first.  The brigadier and two pioneers fell dead; the
Title:  rest of the troop took to flight.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, gentlemen, a sortie!" cried Athos.
Title:  
Title:  And the four friends rushed out of the fort, gained the
Title:  field of battle, picked up the four muskets of the privates
Title:  and the half-pike of the brigadier, and convinced that the
Title:  fugitives would not stop till they reached the city, turned
Title:  again toward the bastion, bearing with them the trophies of
Title:  their victory.
Title:  
Title:  "Reload the muskets, Grimaud," said Athos, "and we,
Title:  gentlemen, will go on with our breakfast, and resume our
Title:  conversation.  Where were we?"
Title:  
Title:  "I recollect you were saying," said d'Artagnan, "that after
Title:  having demanded my head of the cardinal, Milady had quit the
Title:  shores of France.  Whither goes she?" added he, strongly
Title:  interested in the route Milady followed.
Title:  
Title:  "She goes into England," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "With what view?"
Title:  
Title:  "With the view of assassinating, or causing to be
Title:  assassinated, the Duke of Buckingham."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan uttered an exclamation of surprise and
Title:  indignation.
Title:  
Title:  "But this is infamous!" cried he.
Title:  
Title:  "As to that," said Athos, "I beg you to believe that I care
Title:  very little about it.  Now you have done, Grimaud, take our
Title:  brigadier's half-pike, tie a napkin to it, and plant it on
Title:  top of our bastion, that these rebels of Rochellais may see
Title:  that they have to deal with brave and loyal soldiers of the
Title:  king."
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud obeyed without replying.  An instant afterward, the
Title:  white flag was floating over the heads of the four friends.
Title:  A thunder of applause saluted its appearance; half the camp
Title:  was at the barrier.
Title:  
Title:  "How?" replied d'Artagnan, "you care little if she kills
Title:  Buckingham or causes him to be killed?  But the duke is our
Title:  friend."
Title:  
Title:  "The duke is English; the duke fights against us.  Let her
Title:  do what she likes with the duke; I care no more about him
Title:  than an empty bottle."  And Athos threw fifteen paces from
Title:  him an empty bottle from which he had poured the last drop
Title:  into his glass.
Title:  
Title:  "A moment," said d'Artagnan.  "I will not abandon Buckingham
Title:  thus.  He gave us some very fine horses."
Title:  
Title:  "And moreover, very handsome saddles," said Porthos, who at
Title:  the moment wore on his cloak the lace of his own.
Title:  
Title:  "Besides," said Aramis, "God desires the conversion and not
Title:  the death of a sinner."
Title:  
Title:  "Amen!" said Athos, "and we will return to that subject
Title:  later, if such be your pleasure; but what for the moment
Title:  engaged my attention most earnestly, and I am sure you will
Title:  understand me, d'Artagnan, was the getting from this woman a
Title:  kind of carte blanche which she had extorted from the
Title:  cardinal, and by means of which she could with impunity get
Title:  rid of you and perhaps of us."
Title:  
Title:  "But this creature must be a demon!" said Porthos, holding
Title:  out his plate to Aramis, who was cutting up a fowl.
Title:  
Title:  "And this carte blanche," said d'Artagnan, "this carte
Title:  blanche, does it remain in her hands?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, it passed into mine; I will not say without trouble,
Title:  for if I did I should tell a lie."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Athos, I shall no longer count the number of times
Title:  I am indebted to you for my life."
Title:  
Title:  "Then it was to go to her that you left us?" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly."
Title:  
Title:  "And you have that letter of the cardinal?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Here it is," said Athos; and he took the invaluable paper
Title:  from the pocket of his uniform.  D'Artagnan unfolded it with
Title:  one hand, whose trembling he did not even attempt to
Title:  conceal, to read:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Dec. 3, 1627
Title:  
Title:  It is by my order and for the good of the state that the
Title:  bearer of this has done what he has done.
Title:  
Title:  "Richelieu"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "In fact," said Aramis, "it is an absolution according to rule."
Title:  
Title:  "That paper must be torn to pieces," said d'Artagnan, who
Title:  fancied he read in it his sentence of death.
Title:  
Title:  "On the contrary," said Athos, "it must be preserved
Title:  carefully.  I would not give up this paper if covered with
Title:  as many gold pieces."
Title:  
Title:  "And what will she do now?" asked the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Why," replied Athos, carelessly, "she is probably going to
Title:  write to the cardinal that a damned Musketeer, named Athos,
Title:  has taken her safe-conduct from her by force; she will
Title:  advise him in the same letter to get rid of his two friends,
Title:  Aramis and Porthos, at the same time.  The cardinal will
Title:  remember that these are the same men who have often crossed
Title:  his path; and then some fine morning he will arrest
Title:  d'Artagnan, and for fear he should feel lonely, he will send
Title:  us to keep him company in the Bastille."
Title:  
Title:  "Go to!  It appears to me you make dull jokes, my dear,"
Title:  said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "I do not jest," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know," said Porthos, "that to twist that damned
Title:  Milady's neck would be a smaller sin than to twist those of
Title:  these poor devils of Huguenots, who have committed no other
Title:  crime than singing in French the psalms we sing in Latin?"
Title:  
Title:  "What says the abbe?" asked Athos, quietly.
Title:  
Title:  "I say I am entirely of Porthos's opinion," replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "And I, too," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Fortunately, she is far off," said Porthos, "for I confess
Title:  she would worry me if she were here."
Title:  
Title:  "She worries me in England as well as in France," said
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "She worries me everywhere," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "But when you held her in your power, why did you not drown
Title:  her, strangle her, hang her?" said Porthos.  "It is only the
Title:  dead who do not return."
Title:  
Title:  "You think so, Porthos?" replied the Musketeer, with a sad
Title:  smile which d'Artagnan alone understood.
Title:  
Title:  "I have an idea," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "What is it?" said the Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  "To arms!" cried Grimaud.
Title:  
Title:  The young men sprang up, and seized their muskets.
Title:  
Title:  This time a small troop advanced, consisting of from twenty
Title:  to twenty-five men; but they were not pioneers, they were
Title:  soldiers of the garrison.
Title:  
Title:  "Shall we return to the camp?" said Porthos.  "I don't think
Title:  the sides are equal."
Title:  
Title:  "Impossible, for three reasons," replied Athos.  "The first,
Title:  that we have not finished breakfast; the second, that we
Title:  still have some very important things to say; and the third,
Title:  that it yet wants ten minutes before the lapse of the hour."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then," said Aramis, "we must form a plan of battle."
Title:  
Title:  "That's very simple," replied Athos.  "As soon as the enemy
Title:  are within musket shot, we must fire upon them.  If they
Title:  continue to advance, we must fire again.  We must fire as
Title:  long as we have loaded guns.  If those who remain of the
Title:  troop persist in coming to the assault, we will allow the
Title:  besiegers to get as far as the ditch, and then we will push
Title:  down upon their heads that strip of wall which keeps its
Title:  perpendicular by a miracle."
Title:  
Title:  "Bravo!" cried Porthos.  "Decidedly, Athos, you were born to
Title:  be a general, and the cardinal, who fancies himself a great
Title:  soldier, is nothing beside you."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Athos, "no divided attention, I beg; let
Title:  each one pick out his man."
Title:  
Title:  "I cover mine," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "And I mine," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "And I mine," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Fire, then," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  The four muskets made but one report, but four men fell.
Title:  
Title:  The drum immediately beat, and the little troop advanced at
Title:  charging pace.
Title:  
Title:  Then the shots were repeated without regularity, but always
Title:  aimed with the same accuracy.  Nevertheless, as if they had
Title:  been aware of the numerical weakness of the friends, the
Title:  Rochellais continued to advance in quick time.
Title:  
Title:  With every three shots at least two men fell; but the march
Title:  of those who remained was not slackened.
Title:  
Title:  Arrived at the foot of the bastion, there were still more
Title:  than a dozen of the enemy.  A last discharge welcomed them,
Title:  but did not stop them; they jumped into the ditch, and
Title:  prepared to scale the breach.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, my friends," said Athos, "finish them at a blow.  To
Title:  the wall; to the wall!"
Title:  
Title:  And the four friends, seconded by Grimaud, pushed with the
Title:  barrels of their muskets an enormous sheet of the wall,
Title:  which bent as if pushed by the wind, and detaching itself
Title:  from its base, fell with a horrible crash into the ditch.
Title:  Then a fearful crash was heard; a cloud of dust mounted
Title:  toward the sky--and all was over!
Title:  
Title:  "Can we have destroyed them all, from the first to the
Title:  last?" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, it appears so!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "No," cried Porthos; "there go three or four, limping away."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, three or four of these unfortunate men, covered
Title:  with dirt and blood, fled along the hollow way, and at
Title:  length regained the city.  These were all who were left of
Title:  the little troop.
Title:  
Title:  Athos looked at his watch.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said he, "we have been here an hour, and our
Title:  wager is won; but we will be fair players.  Besides,
Title:  d'Artagnan has not told us his idea yet."
Title:  
Title:  And the Musketeer, with his usual coolness, reseated himself
Title:  before the remains of the breakfast.
Title:  
Title:  "My idea?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; you said you had an idea," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I remember," said d'Artagnan.  "Well, I will go to
Title:  England a second time; I will go and find Buckingham."
Title:  
Title:  "You shall not do that, d'Artagnan," said Athos, coolly.
Title:  
Title:  "And why not?  Have I not been there once?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but at that period we were not at war.  At that period
Title:  Buckingham was an ally, and not an enemy.  What you would
Title:  now do amounts to treason."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan perceived the force of this reasoning, and was
Title:  silent.
Title:  
Title:  "But," said Porthos, "I think I have an idea, in my turn."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence for Monsieur Porthos's idea!" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "I will ask leave of absence of Monsieur de Treville, on
Title:  some pretext or other which you must invent; I am not very
Title:  clever at pretexts.  Milady does not know me; I will get
Title:  access to her without her suspecting me, and when I catch my
Title:  beauty, I will strangle her."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," replied Athos, "I am not far from approving the idea
Title:  of Monsieur Porthos."
Title:  
Title:  "For shame!" said Aramis.  "Kill a woman?  No, listen to me;
Title:  I have the true idea."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us see your idea, Aramis," said Athos, who felt much
Title:  deference for the young Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "We must inform the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my faith, yes!" said Porthos and d'Artagnan, at the
Title:  same time; "we are coming nearer to it now."
Title:  
Title:  "Inform the queen!" said Athos; "and how?  Have we relations
Title:  with the court?  Could we send anyone to Paris without its
Title:  being known in the camp?  From here to Paris it is a hundred
Title:  and forty leagues; before our letter was at Angers we should
Title:  be in a dungeon."
Title:  
Title:  "As to remitting a letter with safety to her Majesty," said
Title:  Aramis, coloring, "I will take that upon myself.  I know a
Title:  clever person at Tours--"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis stopped on seeing Athos smile.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, do you not adopt this means, Athos?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I do not reject it altogether," said Athos; "but I wish to
Title:  remind Aramis that he cannot quit the camp, and that nobody
Title:  but one of ourselves is trustworthy; that two hours after
Title:  the messenger has set out, all the Capuchins, all the
Title:  police, all the black caps of the cardinal, will know your
Title:  letter by heart, and you and your clever person will be
Title:  arrested."
Title:  
Title:  "Without reckoning," objected Porthos, "that the queen would
Title:  save Monsieur de Buckingham, but would take no heed of us."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "what Porthos says is full of
Title:  sense."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah! but what's going on in the city yonder?" said
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "They are beating the general alarm."
Title:  
Title:  The four friends listened, and the sound of the drum plainly
Title:  reached them.
Title:  
Title:  "You see, they are going to send a whole regiment against
Title:  us," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "You don't think of holding out against a whole regiment, do
Title:  you?" said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Why not?" said Musketeer.  "I feel myself quite in a humor
Title:  for it; and I would hold out before an army if we had taken
Title:  the precaution to bring a dozen more bottles of wine."
Title:  
Title:  "Upon my word, the drum draws near," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Let it come," said Athos.  "It is a quarter of an hour's
Title:  journey from here to the city, consequently a quarter of an
Title:  hour's journey from the city to hither.  That is more than
Title:  time enough for us to devise a plan.  If we go from this
Title:  place we shall never find another so suitable.  Ah, stop! I
Title:  have it, gentlemen; the right idea has just occurred to me."
Title:  
Title:  "Tell us."
Title:  
Title:  "Allow me to give Grimaud some indispensable orders."
Title:  
Title:  Athos made a sign for his lackey to approach.
Title:  
Title:  "Grimaud," said Athos, pointing to the bodies which lay
Title:  under the wall of the bastion, "take those gentlemen, set
Title:  them up against the wall, put their hats upon their heads,
Title:  and their guns in their hands."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, the great man!" cried d'Artagnan.  "I comprehend now."
Title:  
Title:  "You comprehend?" said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "And do you comprehend, Grimaud?" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.
Title:  
Title:  "That's all that is necessary," said Athos; "now for my
Title:  idea."
Title:  
Title:  "I should like, however, to comprehend," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "That is useless."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes!  Athos's idea!" cried Aramis and d'Artagnan, at
Title:  the same time.
Title:  
Title:  "This Milady, this woman, this creature, this demon, has a
Title:  brother-in-law, as I think you told me, d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I know him very well; and I also believe that he has
Title:  not a very warm affection for his sister-in-law."
Title:  
Title:  "There is no harm in that.  If he detested her, it would be
Title:  all the better," replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "In that case we are as well off as we wish."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet," said Porthos, "I would like to know what Grimaud
Title:  is about."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, Porthos!" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "What is her brother-in-law's name?"
Title:  
Title:  "Lord de Winter."
Title:  
Title:  "Where is he now?"
Title:  
Title:  "He returned to London at the first sound of war."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, there's just the man we want," said Athos.  "It is he
Title:  whom we must warn.  We will have him informed that his
Title:  sister-in-law is on the point of having someone
Title:  assassinated, and beg him not to lose sight of her.  There
Title:  is in London, I hope, some establishment like that of the
Title:  Magdalens, or of the Repentant Daughters.  He must place his
Title:  sister in one of these, and we shall be in peace."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said d'Artagnan, "till she comes out."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my faith!" said Athos, "you require too much,
Title:  d'Artagnan.  I have given you all I have, and I beg leave to
Title:  tell you that this is the bottom of my sack."
Title:  
Title:  "But I think it would be still better," said Aramis, "to
Title:  inform the queen and Lord de Winter at the same time."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; but who is to carry the letter to Tours, and who to
Title:  London?"
Title:  
Title:  "I answer for Bazin," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "And I for Planchet," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Ay," said Porthos, "if we cannot leave the camp, our
Title:  lackeys may."
Title:  
Title:  "To be sure they may; and this very day we will write the
Title:  letters," said Aramis.  "Give the lackeys money, and they
Title:  will start."
Title:  
Title:  "We will give them money?" replied Athos.  "Have you any
Title:  money?"
Title:  
Title:  The four friends looked at one another, and a cloud came
Title:  over the brows which but lately had been so cheerful.
Title:  
Title:  "Look out!" cried d'Artagnan, "I see black points and red
Title:  points moving yonder.  Why did you talk of a regiment,
Title:  Athos?  It is a veritable army!"
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, yes," said Athos; "there they are.  See the
Title:  sneaks come, without drum or trumpet.  Ah, ah! have you
Title:  finished, Grimaud?"
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative, and pointed to a
Title:  dozen bodies which he had set up in the most picturesque
Title:  attitudes.  Some carried arms, others seemed to be taking
Title:  aim, and the remainder appeared merely to be sword in hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Bravo!" said Athos; "that does honor to your imagination."
Title:  
Title:  "All very well," said Porthos, "but I should like to
Title:  understand."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us decamp first, and you will understand afterward."
Title:  
Title:  "A moment, gentlemen, a moment; give Grimaud time to clear
Title:  away the breakfast."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said Aramis, "the black points and the red points
Title:  are visibly enlarging.  I am of d'Artagnan's opinion; we
Title:  have no time to lose in regaining our camp."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith," said Athos, "I have nothing to say against a
Title:  retreat.  We bet upon one hour, and we have stayed an hour
Title:  and a half.  Nothing can be said; let us be off, gentlemen,
Title:  let us be off!"
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud was already ahead, with the basket and the dessert.
Title:  The four friends followed, ten paces behind him.
Title:  
Title:  "What the devil shall we do now, gentlemen?" cried Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Have you forgotten anything?" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "The white flag, morbleu!  We must not leave a flag in the
Title:  hands of the enemy, even if that flag be but a napkin."
Title:  
Title:  And Athos ran back to the bastion, mounted the platform, and
Title:  bore off the flag; but as the Rochellais had arrived within
Title:  musket range, they opened a terrible fire upon this man, who
Title:  appeared to expose himself for pleasure's sake.
Title:  
Title:  But Athos might be said to bear a charmed life.  The balls
Title:  passed and whistled all around him; not one struck him.
Title:  
Title:  Athos waved his flag, turning his back on the guards of the
Title:  city, and saluting those of the camp.  On both sides loud
Title:  cries arose--on the one side cries of anger, on the other
Title:  cries of enthusiasm.
Title:  
Title:  A second discharge followed the first, and three balls, by
Title:  passing through it, made the napkin really a flag.  Cries
Title:  were heard from the camp, "Come down! come down!"
Title:  
Title:  Athos came down; his friends, who anxiously awaited him, saw
Title:  him returned with joy.
Title:  
Title:  "Come along, Athos, come along!" cried d'Artagnan; "now we
Title:  have found everything except money, it would be stupid to be
Title:  killed."
Title:  
Title:  But Athos continued to march majestically, whatever remarks
Title:  his companions made; and they, finding their remarks
Title:  useless, regulated their pace by his.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud and his basket were far in advance, out of the range
Title:  of the balls.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of an instant they heard a furious fusillade.
Title:  
Title:  "What's that?" asked Porthos, "what are they firing at now?
Title:  I hear no balls whistle, and I see nobody!"
Title:  
Title:  "They are firing at the corpses," replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "But the dead cannot return their fire."
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly not!  They will then fancy it is an ambuscade,
Title:  they will deliberate; and by the time they have found out
Title:  the pleasantry, we shall be out of the range of their balls.
Title:  That renders it useless to get a pleurisy by too much
Title:  haste."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I comprehend now," said the astonished Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "That's lucky," said Athos, shrugging his shoulders.
Title:  
Title:  On their part, the French, on seeing the four friends return
Title:  at such a step, uttered cries of enthusiasm.
Title:  
Title:  At length a fresh discharge was heard, and this time the
Title:  balls came rattling among the stones around the four
Title:  friends, and whistling sharply in their ears.  The
Title:  Rochellais had at last taken possession of the bastion.
Title:  
Title:  "These Rochellais are bungling fellows," said Athos; "how
Title:  many have we killed of them--a dozen?"
Title:  
Title:  "Or fifteen."
Title:  
Title:  "How many did we crush under the wall?"
Title:  
Title:  "Eight or ten."
Title:  
Title:  "And in exchange for all that not even a scratch!  Ah, but
Title:  what is the matter with your hand, d'Artagnan?  It bleeds,
Title:  seemingly."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, it's nothing," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "A spent ball?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not even that."
Title:  
Title:  "What is it, then?"
Title:  
Title:  We have said that Athos loved d'Artagnan like a child, and
Title:  this somber and inflexible personage felt the anxiety of a
Title:  parent for the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Only grazed a little," replied d'Artagnan; "my fingers were
Title:  caught between two stones--that of the wall and that of my
Title:  ring--and the skin was broken."
Title:  
Title:  "That comes of wearing diamonds, my master," said Athos,
Title:  disdainfully.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, to be sure," cried Porthos, "there is a diamond.  Why
Title:  the devil, then, do we plague ourselves about money, when
Title:  there is a diamond?"
Title:  
Title:  "Stop a bit!" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Well thought of, Porthos; this time you have an idea."
Title:  
Title:  "Undoubtedly," said Porthos, drawing himself up at Athos's
Title:  compliment; "as there is a diamond, let us sell it."
Title:  
Title:  "But," said d'Artagnan, "it is the queen's diamond."
Title:  
Title:  "The stronger reason why it should be sold," replied Athos.
Title:  The queen saving Monsieur de Buckingham, her lover; nothing
Title:  more just.  The queen saving us, her friends; nothing more
Title:  moral.  Let us sell the diamond.  What says Monsieur the
Title:  Abbe?  I don't ask Porthos; his opinion has been given."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, I think," said Aramis, blushing as usual, "that his
Title:  ring not coming from a mistress, and consequently not being
Title:  a love token, d'Artagnan may sell it."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Aramis, you speak like theology personified.  Your
Title:  advice, then, is--"
Title:  
Title:  "To sell the diamond," replied Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then," said d'Artagnan, gaily, "let us sell the
Title:  diamond, and say no more about it."
Title:  
Title:  The fusillade continued; but the four friends were out of
Title:  reach, and the Rochellais only fired to appease their
Title:  consciences.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, it was time that idea came into Porthos's head.
Title:  Here we are at the camp; therefore, gentlemen, not a word
Title:  more of this affair.  We are observed; they are coming to
Title:  meet us.  We shall be carried in triumph."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, as we have said, the whole camp was in motion.
Title:  More than two thousand persons had assisted, as at a
Title:  spectacle, in this fortunate but wild undertaking of the
Title:  four friends--an undertaking of which they were far from
Title:  suspecting the real motive.  Nothing was heard but cries of
Title:  "Live the Musketeers!  Live the Guards!"  M. de Busigny was
Title:  the first to come and shake Athos by the hand, and
Title:  acknowledge that the wager was lost.  The dragoon and the
Title:  Swiss followed him, and all their comrades followed the
Title:  dragoon and the Swiss.  There was nothing but felicitations,
Title:  pressures of the hand, and embraces; there was no end to the
Title:  inextinguishable laughter at the Rochellais.  The tumult at
Title:  length became so great that the cardinal fancied there must
Title:  be some riot, and sent La Houdiniere, his captain of the
Title:  Guards, to inquire what was going on.
Title:  
Title:  The affair was described to the messenger with all the
Title:  effervescence of enthusiasm.
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" asked the cardinal, on seeing La Houdiniere return.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, monseigneur," replied the latter, "three Musketeers
Title:  and a Guardsman laid a wager with Monsieur de Busigny that
Title:  they would go and breakfast in the bastion St. Gervais; and
Title:  while breakfasting they held it for two hours against the
Title:  enemy, and have killed I don't know how many Rochellais."
Title:  
Title:  "Did you inquire the names of those three Musketeers?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "What are their names?"
Title:  
Title:  "Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis."
Title:  
Title:  "Still my three brave fellows!" murmured the cardinal.  "And
Title:  the Guardsman?"
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  "Still my young scapegrace.  Positively, these four men must
Title:  be on my side."
Title:  
Title:  The same evening the cardinal spoke to M. de Treville of the
Title:  exploit of the morning, which was the talk of the whole
Title:  camp.  M. de Treville, who had received the account of the
Title:  adventure from the mouths of the heroes of it, related it in
Title:  all its details to his Eminence, not forgetting the episode
Title:  of the napkin.
Title:  
Title:  "That's well, Monsieur de Treville," said the cardinal;
Title:  "pray let that napkin be sent to me.  I will have three
Title:  fleur-de-lis embroidered on it in gold, and will give it to
Title:  your company as a standard."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," said M. de Treville, "that will be unjust to
Title:  the Guardsmen.  Monsieur d'Artagnan is not with me; he
Title:  serves under Monsieur Dessessart."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, take him," said the cardinal; "when four men
Title:  are so much attached to one another, it is only fair that
Title:  they should serve in the same company."
Title:  
Title:  That same evening M. de Treville announced this good news to
Title:  the three Musketeers and d'Artagnan, inviting all four to
Title:  breakfast with him next morning.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was beside himself with joy.  We know that the
Title:  dream of his life had been to become a Musketeer.  The three
Title:  friends were likewise greatly delighted.
Title:  
Title:  "My faith," said d'Artagnan to Athos, "you had a triumphant
Title:  idea!  As you said, we have acquired glory, and were enabled
Title:  to carry on a conversation of the highest importance."
Title:  
Title:  "Which we can resume now without anybody suspecting us, for,
Title:  with the help of God, we shall henceforth pass for
Title:  cardinalists."
Title:  
Title:  That evening d'Artagnan went to present his respects to M.
Title:  Dessessart, and inform him of his promotion.
Title:  
Title:  M. Dessessart, who esteemed d'Artagnan, made him offers of
Title:  help, as this change would entail expenses for equipment.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan refused; but thinking the opportunity a good one, he
Title:  begged him to have the diamond he put into his hand valued,
Title:  as he wished to turn it into money.
Title:  
Title:  The next day, M. Dessessart's valet came to d'Artagnan's
Title:  lodging, and gave him a bag containing seven thousand
Title:  livres.
Title:  
Title:  This was the price of the queen's diamond.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  48  A FAMILY AFFAIR
Title:  
Title:  Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.  A family
Title:  affair was not subject to the investigation of the cardinal;
Title:  a family affair concerned nobody.  People might employ
Title:  themselves in a family affair before all the world.
Title:  Therefore Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis had discovered the idea, the lackeys.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos had discovered the means, the diamond.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan alone had discovered nothing--he, ordinarily the
Title:  most inventive of the four; but it must be also said that
Title:  the very name of Milady paralyzed him.
Title:  
Title:  Ah! no, we were mistaken; he had discovered a purchaser for
Title:  his diamond.
Title:  
Title:  The breakfast at M. de Treville's was as gay and cheerful as
Title:  possible.  D'Artagnan already wore his uniform--for being
Title:  nearly of the same size as Aramis, and as Aramis was so
Title:  liberally paid by the publisher who purchased his poem as to
Title:  allow him to buy everything double, he sold his friend a
Title:  complete outfit.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan would have been at the height of his wishes if he
Title:  had not constantly seen Milady like a dark cloud hovering in
Title:  the horizon.
Title:  
Title:  After breakfast, it was agreed that they should meet again
Title:  in the evening at Athos's lodging, and there finish their
Title:  plans.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan passed the day in exhibiting his Musketeer's
Title:  uniform in every street of the camp.
Title:  
Title:  In the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met.
Title:  There only remained three things to decide--what they
Title:  should write to Milady's brother; what they should write to
Title:  the clever person at Tours; and which should be the lackeys
Title:  to carry the letters.
Title:  
Title:  Everyone offered his own.  Athos talked of the discretion of
Title:  Grimaud, who never spoke a word but when his master unlocked
Title:  his mouth.  Porthos boasted of the strength of Mousqueton,
Title:  who was big enough to thrash four men of ordinary size.
Title:  Aramis, confiding in the address of Bazin, made a pompous
Title:  eulogium on his candidate.  Finally, d'Artagnan had entire
Title:  faith in the bravery of Planchet, and reminded them of the
Title:  manner in which he had conducted himself in the ticklish
Title:  affair of Boulogne.
Title:  
Title:  These four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time,
Title:  and gave birth to magnificent speeches which we do not
Title:  repeat here for fear they should be deemed too long.
Title:  
Title:  "Unfortunately," said Athos, "he whom we send must possess
Title:  in himself alone the four qualities united."
Title:  
Title:  "But where is such a lackey to be found?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not to be found!" cried Athos.  "I know it well, so take
Title:  Grimaud."
Title:  
Title:  "Take Mousqueton."
Title:  
Title:  "Take Bazin."
Title:  
Title:  "Take Planchet.  Planchet is brave and shrewd; they are two
Title:  qualities out of the four."
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Aramis, "the principal question is not to
Title:  know which of our four lackeys is the most discreet, the
Title:  most strong, the most clever, or the most brave; the
Title:  principal thing is to know which loves money the best."
Title:  
Title:  "What Aramis says is very sensible," replied Athos; "we must
Title:  speculate upon the faults of people, and not upon their
Title:  virtues.  Monsieur Abbe, you are a great moralist."
Title:  
Title:  "Doubtless," said Aramis, "for we not only require to be
Title:  well served in order to succeed, but moreover, not to fail;
Title:  for in case of failure, heads are in question, not for our
Title:  lackeys--"
Title:  
Title:  "Speak lower, Aramis," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "That's wise--not for the lackeys," resumed Aramis, "but for
Title:  the master--for the masters, we may say.  Are our lackeys
Title:  sufficiently devoted to us to risk their lives for us?  No."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith," said d'Artagnan.  "I would almost answer for
Title:  Planchet."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, my dear friend, add to his natural devotedness a good
Title:  sum of money, and then, instead of answering for him once,
Title:  answer for him twice."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, good God! you will be deceived just the same," said
Title:  Athos, who was an optimist when things were concerned, and a
Title:  pessimist when men were in question.  "They will promise
Title:  everything for the sake of the money, and on the road fear
Title:  will prevent them from acting.  Once taken, they will be
Title:  pressed; when pressed, they will confess everything.  What
Title:  the devil! we are not children.  To reach England"--Athos
Title:  lowered his voice--"all France, covered with spies and
Title:  creatures of the cardinal, must be crossed.  A passport for
Title:  embarkation must be obtained; and the party must be
Title:  acquainted with English in order to ask the way to London.
Title:  Really, I think the thing very difficult."
Title:  
Title:  "Not at all," cried d'Artagnan, who was anxious the matter
Title:  should be accomplished; "on the contrary, I think it very
Title:  easy.  It would be, no doubt, parbleu, if we write to Lord
Title:  de Winter about affairs of vast importance, of the horrors
Title:  of the cardinal--"
Title:  
Title:  "Speak lower!" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "--of intrigues and secrets of state," continued d'Artagnan,
Title:  complying with the recommendation.  "There can be no doubt
Title:  we would all be broken on the wheel; but for God's sake, do
Title:  not forget, as you yourself said, Athos, that we only write
Title:  to him concerning a family affair; that we only write to him
Title:  to entreat that as soon as Milady arrives in London he will
Title:  put it out of her power to injure us.  I will write to him,
Title:  then, nearly in these terms."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us see," said Athos, assuming in advance a critical
Title:  look.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur and dear friend--"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, yes!  Dear friend to an Englishman," interrupted Athos;
Title:  "well commenced!  Bravo, d'Artagnan!  Only with that word
Title:  you would be quartered instead of being broken on the
Title:  wheel."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, perhaps.  I will say, then, Monsieur, quite short."
Title:  
Title:  "You may even say, My Lord," replied Athos, who stickled for
Title:  propriety.
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, do you remember the little goat pasture of the
Title:  Luxembourg?"
Title:  
Title:  "Good, the Luxembourg!  One might believe this is an
Title:  allusion to the queen-mother!  That's ingenious," said
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, we will put simply, My Lord, do you remember a
Title:  certain little enclosure where your life was spared?"
Title:  
Title:  "My dear d'Artagnan, you will never make anything but a very
Title:  bad secretary.  Where your life was spared!  For shame!
Title:  that's unworthy.  A man of spirit is not to be reminded of
Title:  such services.  A benefit reproached is an offense
Title:  committed."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!" said d'Artagnan, "you are insupportable.  If
Title:  the letter must be written under your censure, my faith, I
Title:  renounce the task."
Title:  
Title:  "And you will do right.  Handle the musket and the sword, my
Title:  dear fellow.  You will come off splendidly at those two
Title:  exercises; but pass the pen over to Monsieur Abbe.  That's
Title:  his province."
Title:  
Title:  "Ay, ay!" said Porthos; "pass the pen to Aramis, who writes
Title:  theses in Latin."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, so be it," said d'Artagnan.  "Draw up this note for
Title:  us, Aramis; but by our Holy Father the Pope, cut it short,
Title:  for I shall prune you in my turn, I warn you."
Title:  
Title:  "I ask no better," said Aramis, with that ingenious air of
Title:  confidence which every poet has in himself; "but let me be
Title:  properly acquainted with the subject.  I have heard here and
Title:  there that this sister-in-law was a hussy.  I have obtained
Title:  proof of it by listening to her conversation with the
Title:  cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Lower! SACRE BLEU!" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "But," continued Aramis, "the details escape me."
Title:  
Title:  "And me also," said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan and Athos looked at each other for some time in
Title:  silence.  At length Athos, after serious reflection and
Title:  becoming more pale than usual, made a sign of assent to
Title:  d'Artagnan, who by it understood he was at liberty to speak.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, this is what you have to say," said d'Artagnan:  "My
Title:  Lord, your sister-in-law is an infamous woman, who wished to
Title:  have you killed that she might inherit your wealth; but she
Title:  could not marry your brother, being already married in
Title:  France, and having been--" d'Artagnan stopped, as if
Title:  seeking for the word, and looked at Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Repudiated by her husband," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Because she had been branded," continued d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!" cried Porthos.  "Impossible!  What do you say--that
Title:  she wanted to have her brother-in-law killed?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "She was married?" asked Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "And her husband found out that she had a fleur-de-lis on
Title:  her shoulder?" cried Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  These three yeses had been pronounced by Athos, each with a
Title:  sadder intonation.
Title:  
Title:  "And who has seen this fleur-de-lis?" inquired Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan and I.  Or rather, to observe the chronological
Title:  order, I and d'Artagnan," replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "And does the husband of this frightful creature still
Title:  live?"  said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "He still lives."
Title:  
Title:  "Are you quite sure of it?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am he."
Title:  
Title:  There was a moment of cold silence, during which everyone
Title:  was affected according to his nature.
Title:  
Title:  "This time," said Athos, first breaking the silence,
Title:  "d'Artagnan has given us an excellent program, and the
Title:  letter must be written at once."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  You are right, Athos," said Aramis; "and it is
Title:  a rather difficult matter.  The chancellor himself would be
Title:  puzzled how to write such a letter, and yet the chancellor
Title:  draws up an official report very readily.  Never mind!  Be
Title:  silent, I will write."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis accordingly took the quill, reflected for a few
Title:  moments, wrote eight or ten lines in a charming little
Title:  female hand, and then with a voice soft and slow, as if each
Title:  word had been scrupulously weighed, he read the following:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, The person who writes these few lines had the
Title:  honor of crossing swords with you in the little enclosure of
Title:  the Rue d'Enfer.  As you have several times since declared
Title:  yourself the friend of that person, he thinks it his duty to
Title:  respond to that friendship by sending you important
Title:  information.  Twice you have nearly been the victim of a near relative,
Title:  whom you believe to be your heir because you
Title:  are ignorant that before she contracted a marriage in
Title:  England she was already married in France.  But the third
Title:  time, which is the present, you may succumb.  Your relative
Title:  left La Rochelle for England during the night.  Watch her
Title:  arrival, for she has great and terrible projects.  If you
Title:  require to know positively what she is capable of, read her
Title:  past history on her left shoulder."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Well, now that will do wonderfully well," said Athos.  "My
Title:  dear Aramis, you have the pen of a secretary of state.  Lord
Title:  de Winter will now be upon his guard if the letter should
Title:  reach him; and even if it should fall into the hands of the
Title:  cardinal, we shall not be compromised.  But as the lackey
Title:  who goes may make us believe he has been to London and may
Title:  stop at Chatellerault, let us give him only half the sum
Title:  promised him, with the letter, with an agreement that he
Title:  shall have the other half in exchange for the reply.  Have
Title:  you the diamond?" continued Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "I have what is still better.  I have the price"; and
Title:  d'Artagnan threw the bag upon the table.  At the sound of
Title:  the gold Aramis raised his eyes and Porthos started.  As to
Title:  Athos, he remained unmoved.
Title:  
Title:  "How much in that little bag?"
Title:  
Title:  "Seven thousand livres, in louis of twelve francs."
Title:  
Title:  "Seven thousand livres!" cried Porthos.  "That poor little
Title:  diamond was worth seven thousand livres?"
Title:  
Title:  "It appears so," said Athos, "since here they are.  I don't
Title:  suppose that our friend d'Artagnan has added any of his own
Title:  to the amount."
Title:  
Title:  "But, gentlemen, in all this," said d'Artagnan, "we do not
Title:  think of the queen.  Let us take some heed of the welfare of
Title:  her dear Buckingham.  That is the least we owe her."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true," said Athos; "but that concerns Aramis."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," replied the latter, blushing, "what must I say?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, that's simple enough!" replied Athos.  "Write a second
Title:  letter for that clever personage who lives at Tours."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis resumed his pen, reflected a little, and wrote the
Title:  following lines, which he immediately submitted to the
Title:  approbation of his friends.
Title:  
Title:  "My dear cousin."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said Athos.  "This clever person is your relative,
Title:  then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Cousin-german."
Title:  
Title:  "Go on, to your cousin, then!"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis continued:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Cousin, His Eminence, the cardinal, whom God
Title:  preserve for the happiness of France and the confusion of
Title:  the enemies of the kingdom, is on the point of putting an
Title:  end to the hectic rebellion of La Rochelle.  It is probable
Title:  that the succor of the English fleet will never even arrive
Title:  in sight of the place.  I will even venture to say that I am
Title:  certain M. de Buckingham will be prevented from setting out
Title:  by some great event.  His Eminence is the most illustrious
Title:  politician of times past, of times present, and probably of
Title:  times to come.  He would extinguish the sun if the sun
Title:  incommoded him.  Give these happy tidings to your sister, my
Title:  dear cousin.  I have dreamed that the unlucky Englishman was
Title:  dead.  I cannot recollect whether it was by steel or by
Title:  poison; only of this I am sure, I have dreamed he was dead,
Title:  and you know my dreams never deceive me.  Be assured, then,
Title:  of seeing me soon return."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Capital!" cried Athos; "you are the king of poets, my dear
Title:  Aramis.  You speak like the Apocalypse, and you are as true
Title:  as the Gospel.  There is nothing now to do but to put the
Title:  address to this letter."
Title:  
Title:  "That is easily done," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  He folded the letter fancifully, and took up his pen and
Title:  wrote:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "To Mlle. Michon, seamstress, Tours."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The three friends looked at one another and laughed; they
Title:  were caught.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said Aramis, "you will please to understand,
Title:  gentlemen, that Bazin alone can carry this letter to Tours.
Title:  My cousin knows nobody but Bazin, and places confidence in
Title:  nobody but him; any other person would fail.  Besides, Bazin
Title:  is ambitious and learned; Bazin has read history, gentlemen,
Title:  he knows that Sixtus the Fifth became Pope after having kept
Title:  pigs.  Well, as he means to enter the Church at the same
Title:  time as myself, he does not despair of becoming Pope in his
Title:  turn, or at least a cardinal.  You can understand that a man
Title:  who has such views will never allow himself to be taken, or
Title:  if taken, will undergo martyrdom rather than speak."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well," said d'Artagnan, "I consent to Bazin with all
Title:  my heart, but grant me Planchet.  Milady had him one day
Title:  turned out of doors, with sundry blows of a good stick to
Title:  accelerate his motions.  Now, Planchet has an excellent
Title:  memory; and I will be bound that sooner than relinquish any
Title:  possible means of vengeance, he will allow himself to be
Title:  beaten to death.  If your arrangements at Tours are your
Title:  arrangements, Aramis, those of London are mine.  I request,
Title:  then, that Planchet may be chosen, more particularly as he
Title:  has already been to London with me, and knows how to speak
Title:  correctly:  London, sir, if you please, and my master, Lord
Title:  d'Artagnan.  With that you may be satisfied he can make his
Title:  way, both going and returning."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case," said Athos, "Planchet must receive seven
Title:  hundred livres for going, and seven hundred livres for
Title:  coming back; and Bazin, three hundred livres for going, and
Title:  three hundred livres for returning--that will reduce the sum
Title:  to five thousand livres.  We will each take a thousand
Title:  livres to be employed as seems good, and we will leave a
Title:  fund of a thousand livres under the guardianship of Monsieur
Title:  Abbe here, for extraordinary occasions or common wants.
Title:  Will that do?"
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Athos," said Aramis, "you speak like Nestor, who
Title:  was, as everyone knows, the wisest among the Greeks."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then," said Athos, "it is agreed.  Planchet and Bazin
Title:  shall go.  Everything considered, I am not sorry to retain
Title:  Grimaud; he is accustomed to my ways, and I am particular.
Title:  Yesterday's affair must have shaken him a little; his voyage
Title:  would upset him quite."
Title:  
Title:  Planchet was sent for, and instructions were given him.  The
Title:  matter had been named to him by d'Artagnan, who in the first
Title:  place pointed out the money to him, then the glory, and then
Title:  the danger.
Title:  
Title:  "I will carry the letter in the lining of my coat," said
Title:  Planchet; "and if I am taken I will swallow it."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, but then you will not be able to fulfill your
Title:  commission," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "You will give me a copy this evening, which I shall know by
Title:  heart tomorrow."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan looked at his friends, as if to say, "Well, what
Title:  did I tell you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Now," continued he, addressing Planchet, "you have eight
Title:  days to get an interview with Lord de Winter; you have eight
Title:  days to return--in all sixteen days.  If, on the sixteenth
Title:  day after your departure, at eight o'clock in the evening
Title:  you are not here, no money--even if it be but five minutes
Title:  past eight."
Title:  
Title:  "Then, monsieur," said Planchet, "you must buy me a watch."
Title:  
Title:  "Take this," said Athos, with his usual careless generosity,
Title:  giving him his own, "and be a good lad.  Remember, if you
Title:  talk, if you babble, if you get drunk, you risk your
Title:  master's head, who has so much confidence in your fidelity,
Title:  and who answers for you.  But remember, also, that if by
Title:  your fault any evil happens to d'Artagnan, I will find you,
Title:  wherever you may be, for the purpose of ripping up your
Title:  belly."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, monsieur!" said Planchet, humiliated by the suspicion,
Title:  and moreover, terrified at the calm air of the Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  "And I," said Porthos, rolling his large eyes, "remember, I
Title:  will skin you alive."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur!"
Title:  
Title:  "And I," said Aramis, with his soft, melodius voice,
Title:  "remember that I will roast you at a slow fire, like a
Title:  savage."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur!"
Title:  
Title:  Planchet began to weep.  We will not venture to say whether
Title:  it was from terror created by the threats or from tenderness
Title:  at seeing four friends so closely united.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took his hand.  "See, Planchet," said he, "these
Title:  gentlemen only say this out of affection for me, but at
Title:  bottom they all like you."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur," said Planchet, "I will succeed or I will
Title:  consent to be cut in quarters; and if they do cut me in
Title:  quarters, be assured that not a morsel of me will speak."
Title:  
Title:  It was decided that Planchet should set out the next day, at
Title:  eight o'clock in the morning, in order, as he had said, that
Title:  he might during the night learn the letter by heart.  He
Title:  gained just twelve hours by this engagement; he was to be
Title:  back on the sixteenth day, by eight o'clock in the evening.
Title:  
Title:  In the morning, as he was mounting his horse, d'Artagnan,
Title:  who felt at the bottom of his heart a partiality for the
Title:  duke, took Planchet aside.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen," said he to him.  "When you have given the letter
Title:  to Lord de Winter and he has read it, you will further say
Title:  to him:  Watch over his Grace Lord Buckingham, for they wish
Title:  to assassinate him.  But this, Planchet, is so serious and
Title:  important that I have not informed my friends that I would
Title:  entrust this secret to you; and for a captain's commission I
Title:  would not write it."
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied, monsieur," said Planchet, "you shall see if
Title:  confidence can be placed in me."
Title:  
Title:  Mounted on an excellent horse, which he was to leave at the
Title:  end of twenty leagues in order to take the post, Planchet
Title:  set off at a gallop, his spirits a little depressed by the
Title:  triple promise made him by the Musketeers, but otherwise as
Title:  light-hearted as possible.
Title:  
Title:  Bazin set out the next day for Tours, and was allowed eight
Title:  days for performing his commission.
Title:  
Title:  The four friends, during the period of these two absences,
Title:  had, as may well be supposed, the eye on the watch, the nose
Title:  to the wind, and the ear on the hark.  Their days were
Title:  passed in endeavoring to catch all that was said, in
Title:  observing the proceeding of the cardinal, and in looking out
Title:  for all the couriers who arrived.  More than once an
Title:  involuntary trembling seized them when called upon for some
Title:  unexpected service.  They had, besides, to look constantly
Title:  to their own proper safety; Milady was a phantom which, when
Title:  it had once appeared to people, did not allow them to sleep
Title:  very quietly.
Title:  
Title:  On the morning of the eighth day, Bazin, fresh as ever, and
Title:  smiling, according to custom, entered the cabaret of the
Title:  Parpaillot as the four friends were sitting down to
Title:  breakfast, saying, as had been agreed upon: "Monsieur
Title:  Aramis, the answer from your cousin."
Title:  
Title:  The four friends exchanged a joyful glance; half of the work
Title:  was done.  It is true, however, that it was the shorter and
Title:  easier part.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis, blushing in spite of himself, took the letter, which
Title:  was in a large, coarse hand and not particular for its
Title:  orthography.
Title:  
Title:  "Good God!" cried he, laughing, "I quite despair of my poor
Title:  Michon; she will never write like Monsieur de Voiture."
Title:  
Title:  "What does you mean by boor Michon?" said the Swiss, who was
Title:  chatting with the four friends when the letter came.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, pardieu, less than nothing," said Aramis; "a charming
Title:  little seamstress, whom I love dearly and from whose hand I
Title:  requested a few lines as a sort of keepsake."
Title:  
Title:  "The duvil!" said the Swiss, "if she is as great a lady as
Title:  her writing is large, you are a lucky fellow, gomrade!"
Title:  
Title:  Aramis read the letter, and passed it to Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "See what she writes to me, Athos," said he.
Title:  
Title:  Athos cast a glance over the epistle, and to disperse all
Title:  the suspicions that might have been created, read aloud:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "My cousin, My sister and I are skillful in interpreting
Title:  dreams, and even entertain great fear of them; but of yours
Title:  it may be said, I hope, every dream is an illusion.  Adieu!
Title:  Take care of yourself, and act so that we may from time to
Title:  time hear you spoken of.
Title:  
Title:  "Marie Michon"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "And what dream does she mean?" asked the dragoon, who had
Title:  approached during the reading.
Title:  
Title:  "Yez; what's the dream?" said the Swiss.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, pardieu!" said Aramis, "it was only this:  I had a
Title:  dream, and I related it to her."
Title:  
Title:  "Yez, yez," said the Swiss; "it's simple enough to dell a
Title:  dream, but I neffer dream."
Title:  
Title:  "You are very fortunate," said Athos, rising; "I wish I
Title:  could say as much!"
Title:  
Title:  "Neffer," replied the Swiss, enchanted that a man like Athos
Title:  could envy him anything.  "Neffer, neffer!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, seeing Athos rise, did likewise, took his arm,
Title:  and went out.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis remained behind to encounter the jokes of
Title:  the dragoon and the Swiss.
Title:  
Title:  As to Bazin, he went and lay down on a truss of straw; and
Title:  as he had more imagination than the Swiss, he dreamed that
Title:  Aramis, having become pope, adorned his head with a
Title:  cardinal's hat.
Title:  
Title:  But, as we have said, Bazin had not, by his fortunate
Title:  return, removed more than a part of the uneasiness which
Title:  weighed upon the four friends.  The days of expectation are
Title:  long, and d'Artagnan, in particular, would have wagered that
Title:  the days were forty-four hours.  He forgot the necessary
Title:  slowness of navigation; he exaggerated to himself the power
Title:  of Milady.  He credited this woman, who appeared to him the
Title:  equal of a demon, with agents as supernatural as herself; at
Title:  the least noise, he imagined himself about to be arrested,
Title:  and that Planchet was being brought back to be confronted
Title:  with himself and his friends.  Still further, his confidence
Title:  in the worthy Picard, at one time so great, diminished day
Title:  by day.  This anxiety became so great that it even extended
Title:  to Aramis and Porthos.  Athos alone remained unmoved, as if
Title:  no danger hovered over him, and as if he breathed his
Title:  customary atmosphere.
Title:  
Title:  On the sixteenth day, in particular, these signs were so
Title:  strong in d'Artagnan and his two friends that they could not
Title:  remain quiet in one place, and wandered about like ghosts on
Title:  the road by which Planchet was expected.
Title:  
Title:  "Really," said Athos to them, "you are not men but children,
Title:  to let a woman terrify you so!  And what does it amount to,
Title:  after all?  To be imprisoned.  Well, but we should be taken
Title:  out of prison; Madame Bonacieux was released.  To be
Title:  decapitated?  Why, every day in the trenches we go
Title:  cheerfully to expose ourselves to worse than that--for a
Title:  bullet may break a leg, and I am convinced a surgeon would
Title:  give us more pain in cutting off a thigh than an executioner
Title:  in cutting off a head.  Wait quietly, then; in two hours, in
Title:  four, in six hours at latest, Planchet will be here.  He
Title:  promised to be here, and I have very great faith in
Title:  Planchet, who appears to me to be a very good lad."
Title:  
Title:  "But if he does not come?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, if he does not come, it will be because he has been
Title:  delayed, that's all.  He may have fallen from his horse, he
Title:  may have cut a caper from the deck; he may have traveled so
Title:  fast against the wind as to have brought on a violent
Title:  catarrh.  Eh, gentlemen, let us reckon upon accidents!  Life
Title:  is a chaplet of little miseries which the philosopher counts
Title:  with a smile.  Be philosophers, as I am, gentlemen; sit down
Title:  at the table and let us drink.  Nothing makes the future
Title:  look so bright as surveying it through a glass of
Title:  chambertin."
Title:  
Title:  "That's all very well," replied d'Artagnan; "but I am tired
Title:  of fearing when I open a fresh bottle that the wine may come
Title:  from the cellar of Milady."
Title:  
Title:  "You are very fastidious," said Athos; "such a beautiful
Title:  woman!"
Title:  
Title:  "A woman of mark!" said Porthos, with his loud laugh.
Title:  
Title:  Athos started, passed his hand over his brow to remove the
Title:  drops of perspiration that burst forth, and rose in his turn
Title:  with a nervous movement he could not repress.
Title:  
Title:  The day, however, passed away; and the evening came on
Title:  slowly, but finally it came.  The bars were filled with
Title:  drinkers.  Athos, who had pocketed his share of the diamond,
Title:  seldom quit the Parpaillot.  He had found in M. de Busigny,
Title:  who, by the by, had given them a magnificent dinner, a
Title:  partner worthy of his company.  They were playing together,
Title:  as usual, when seven o'clock sounded; the patrol was heard
Title:  passing to double the posts.  At half past seven the retreat
Title:  was sounded.
Title:  
Title:  "We are lost," said d'Artagnan, in the ear of Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "You mean to say we have lost," said Athos, quietly, drawing
Title:  four pistoles from his pocket and throwing them upon the
Title:  table.  "Come, gentlemen," said he, "they are beating the
Title:  tattoo.  Let us to bed!"
Title:  
Title:  And Athos went out of the Parpaillot, followed by
Title:  d'Artagnan.  Aramis came behind, giving his arm to Porthos.
Title:  Aramis mumbled verses to himself, and Porthos from time to
Title:  time pulled a hair or two from his mustache, in sign of
Title:  despair.
Title:  
Title:  But all at once a shadow appeared in the darkness the
Title:  outline of which was familiar to d'Artagnan, and a well-
Title:  known voice said, "Monsieur, I have brought your cloak; it
Title:  is chilly this evening."
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet!" cried d'Artagnan, beside himself with joy.
Title:  
Title:  "Planchet!" repeated Aramis and Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, yes, Planchet, to be sure," said Athos, "what is
Title:  there so astonishing in that?  He promised to be back by
Title:  eight o'clock, and eight is striking.  Bravo, Planchet, you
Title:  are a lad of your word, and if ever you leave your master, I
Title:  will promise you a place in my service."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no, never," said Planchet, "I will never leave Monsieur
Title:  d'Artagnan."
Title:  
Title:  At the same time d'Artagnan felt that Planchet slipped a
Title:  note into his hand.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan felt a strong inclination to embrace Planchet as
Title:  he had embraced him on his departure; but he feared lest
Title:  this mark of affection, bestowed upon his lackey in the open
Title:  street, might appear extraordinary to passers-by, and he
Title:  restrained himself.
Title:  
Title:  "I have the note," said he to Athos and to his friends.
Title:  
Title:  "That's well," said Athos, "let us go home and read it."
Title:  
Title:  The note burned the hand of d'Artagnan.  He wished to hasten
Title:  their steps; but Athos took his arm and passed it under his
Title:  own, and the young man was forced to regulate his pace by
Title:  that of his friend.
Title:  
Title:  At length they reached the tent, lit a lamp, and while
Title:  Planchet stood at the entrance that the four friends might
Title:  not be surprised, d'Artagnan, with a trembling hand, broke
Title:  the seal and opened the so anxiously expected letter.
Title:  
Title:  It contained half a line, in a hand perfectly British, and
Title:  with a conciseness as perfectly Spartan:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Thank you; be easy.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  d'Artagnan translated this for the others.
Title:  
Title:  Athos took the letter from the hands of d'Artagnan,
Title:  approached the lamp, set fire to the paper, and did not let
Title:  go till it was reduced to a cinder.
Title:  
Title:  Then, calling Planchet, he said, "Now, my lad, you may claim
Title:  your seven hundred livres, but you did not run much risk
Title:  with such a note as that."
Title:  
Title:  "I am not to blame for having tried every means to compress
Title:  it," said Planchet.
Title:  
Title:  "Well!" cried d'Artagnan, "tell us all about it."
Title:  
Title:  "Dame, that's a long job, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right, Planchet," said Athos; "besides, the tattoo
Title:  has been sounded, and we should be observed if we kept a
Title:  light burning much longer than the others."
Title:  
Title:  "So be it," said d'Artagnan.  "Go to bed, Planchet, and
Title:  sleep soundly."
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, monsieur! that will be the first time I have done
Title:  so for sixteen days."
Title:  
Title:  "And me, too!" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "And me, too!" said Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "And me, too!" said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, if you will have the truth, and me, too!" said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  49  FATALITY
Title:  
Title:  Meantime Milady, drunk with passion, roaring on the deck like a
Title:  lioness that has been embarked, had been tempted to throw herself
Title:  into the sea that she might regain the coast, for she could not
Title:  get rid of the thought that she had been insulted by d'Artagnan,
Title:  threatened by Athos, and that she had quit France without being
Title:  revenged on them.  This idea soon became so insupportable to her
Title:  that at the risk of whatever terrible consequences might result
Title:  to herself from it, she implored the captain to put her on shore;
Title:  but the captain, eager to escape from his false position--placed
Title:  between French and English cruisers, like the bat between the
Title:  mice and the birds--was in great haste to regain England, and
Title:  positively refused to obey what he took for a woman's caprice,
Title:  promising his passenger, who had been particularly recommended to
Title:  him by the cardinal, to land her, if the sea and the French
Title:  permitted him, at one of the ports of Brittany, either at Lorient
Title:  or Brest.  But the wind was contrary, the sea bad; they tacked
Title:  and kept offshore.  Nine days after leaving the Charente, pale
Title:  with fatigue and vexation, Milady saw only the blue coasts of
Title:  Finisterre appear.
Title:  
Title:  She calculated that to cross this corner of France and return to
Title:  the cardinal it would take her at least three days.  Add another
Title:  day for landing, and that would make four.  Add these four to the
Title:  nine others, that would be thirteen days lost--thirteen days,
Title:  during which so many important events might pass in London.  She
Title:  reflected likewise that the cardinal would be furious at her
Title:  return, and consequently would be more disposed to listen to the
Title:  complaints brought against her than to the accusations she
Title:  brought against others.
Title:  
Title:  She allowed the vessel to pass Lorient and Brest without
Title:  repeating her request to the captain, who, on his part, took care
Title:  not to remind her of it.  Milady therefore continued her voyage,
Title:  and on the very day that Planchet embarked at Portsmouth for
Title:  France, the messenger of his Eminence entered the port in
Title:  triumph.
Title:  
Title:  All the city was agitated by an extraordinary movement.  Four
Title:  large vessels, recently built, had just been launched.  At the
Title:  end of the jetty, his clothes richly laced with gold, glittering,
Title:  as was customary with him, with diamonds and precious stones, his
Title:  hat ornamented with a white feather which drooped upon his
Title:  shoulder, Buckingham was seen surrounded by a staff almost as
Title:  brilliant as himself.
Title:  
Title:  It was one of those rare and beautiful days in winter when
Title:  England remembers that there is a sun.  The star of day, pale but
Title:  nevertheless still splendid, was setting in the horizon,
Title:  glorifying at once the heavens and the sea with bands of fire,
Title:  and casting upon the towers and the old houses of the city a last
Title:  ray of gold which made the windows sparkle like the reflection of
Title:  a conflagration.  Breathing that sea breeze, so much more
Title:  invigorating and balsamic as the land is approached,
Title:  contemplating all the power of those preparations she was
Title:  commissioned to destroy, all the power of that army which she was
Title:  to combat alone--she, a woman with a few bags of gold--Milady
Title:  compared herself mentally to Judith, the terrible Jewess, when
Title:  she penetrated the camp of the Assyrians and beheld the enormous
Title:  mass of chariots, horses, men, and arms, which a gesture of her
Title:  hand was to dissipate like a cloud of smoke.
Title:  
Title:  They entered the roadstead; but as they drew near in order to
Title:  cast anchor, a little cutter, looking like a coastguard
Title:  formidably armed, approached the merchant vessel and dropped into
Title:  the sea a boat which directed its course to the ladder.  This
Title:  boat contained an officer, a mate, and eight rowers.  The officer
Title:  alone went on board, where he was received with all the deference
Title:  inspired by the uniform.
Title:  
Title:  The officer conversed a few instants with the captain, gave him
Title:  several papers, of which he was the bearer, to read, and upon the
Title:  order of the merchant captain the whole crew of the vessel, both
Title:  passengers and sailors, were called upon deck.
Title:  
Title:  When this species of summons was made the officer inquired aloud
Title:  the point of the brig's departure, its route, its landings; and
Title:  to all these questions the captain replied without difficulty and
Title:  without hesitation.  Then the officer began to pass in review all
Title:  the people, one after the other, and stopping when he came to
Title:  Milady, surveyed her very closely, but without addressing a
Title:  single word to her.
Title:  
Title:  He then returned to the captain, said a few words to him, and as
Title:  if from that moment the vessel was under his command, he ordered
Title:  a maneuver which the crew executed immediately.  Then the vessel
Title:  resumed its course, still escorted by the little cutter, which
Title:  sailed side by side with it, menacing it with the mouths of its
Title:  six cannon.  The boat followed in the wake of the ship, a speck
Title:  near the enormous mass.
Title:  
Title:  During the examination of Milady by the officer, as may well be
Title:  imagined, Milady on her part was not less scrutinizing in her
Title:  glances.  But however great was the power of this woman with eyes
Title:  of flame in reading the hearts of those whose secrets she wished
Title:  to divine, she met this time with a countenance of such
Title:  impassivity that no discovery followed her investigation.  The
Title:  officer who had stopped in front of her and studied her with so
Title:  much care might have been twenty-five or twenty-six years of age.
Title:  He was of pale complexion, with clear blue eyes, rather deeply
Title:  set; his mouth, fine and well cut, remained motionless in its
Title:  correct lines; his chin, strongly marked, denoted that strength
Title:  of will which in the ordinary Britannic type denotes mostly
Title:  nothing but obstinacy; a brow a little receding, as is proper for
Title:  poets, enthusiasts, and soldiers, was scarcely shaded by short
Title:  thin hair which, like the beard which covered the lower part of
Title:  his face, was of a beautiful deep chestnut color.
Title:  
Title:  When they entered the port, it was already night.  The fog
Title:  increased the darkness, and formed round the sternlights and
Title:  lanterns of the jetty a circle like that which surrounds the moon
Title:  when the weather threatens to become rainy.  The air they
Title:  breathed was heavy, damp, and cold.
Title:  
Title:  Milady, that woman so courageous and firm, shivered in spite of
Title:  herself.
Title:  
Title:  The officer desired to have Milady's packages pointed out to him,
Title:  and ordered them to be placed in the boat.  When this operation
Title:  was complete, he invited her to descend by offering her his hand.
Title:  
Title:  Milady looked at this man, and hesitated.  "Who are you, sir,"
Title:  asked she, "who has the kindness to trouble yourself so
Title:  particularly on my account?"
Title:  
Title:  "You may perceive, madame, by my uniform, that I am an officer in
Title:  the English navy," replied the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "But is it the custom for the officers in the English navy to
Title:  place themselves at the service of their female compatriots when
Title:  they land in a port of Great Britain, and carry their gallantry
Title:  so far as to conduct them ashore?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, madame, it is the custom, not from gallantry but prudence,
Title:  that in time of war foreigners should be conducted to particular
Title:  hotels, in order that they may remain under the eye of the
Title:  government until full information can be obtained about them."
Title:  
Title:  These words were pronounced with the most exact politeness and
Title:  the most perfect calmness.  Nevertheless, they had not the power
Title:  of convincing Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "But I am not a foreigner, sir," said she, with an accent as pure
Title:  as ever was heard between Portsmouth and Manchester; "my name is
Title:  Lady Clarik, and this measure--"
Title:  
Title:  "This measure is general, madame; and you will seek in vain to
Title:  evade it."
Title:  
Title:  "I will follow you, then, sir."
Title:  
Title:  Accepting the hand of the officer, she began the descent of the
Title:  ladder, at the foot of which the boat waited.  The officer
Title:  followed her.  A large cloak was spread at the stern; the officer
Title:  requested her to sit down upon this cloak, and placed himself
Title:  beside her.
Title:  
Title:  "Row!" said he to the sailors.
Title:  
Title:  The eight oars fell at once into the sea, making but a single
Title:  sound, giving but a single stroke, and the boat seemed to fly
Title:  over the surface of the water.
Title:  
Title:  In five minutes they gained the land.
Title:  
Title:  The officer leaped to the pier, and offered his hand to Milady.
Title:  A carriage was in waiting.
Title:  
Title:  "Is this carriage for us?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, madame," replied the officer.
Title:  
Title:  "The hotel, then, is far away?"
Title:  
Title:  "At the other end of the town."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well," said Milady; and she resolutely entered the
Title:  carriage.
Title:  
Title:  The officer saw that the baggage was fastened carefully behind
Title:  the carriage; and this operation ended, he took his place beside
Title:  Milady, and shut the door.
Title:  
Title:  Immediately, without any order being given or his place of
Title:  destination indicated, the coachman set off at a rapid pace, and
Title:  plunged into the streets of the city.
Title:  
Title:  So strange a reception naturally gave Milady ample matter for
Title:  reflection; so seeing that the young officer did not seem at all
Title:  disposed for conversation, she reclined in her corner of the
Title:  carriage, and one after the other passed in review all the
Title:  surmises which presented themselves to her mind.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of a quarter of an hour, however, surprised at the
Title:  length of the journey, she leaned forward toward the door to see
Title:  whither she was being conducted.  Houses were no longer to be
Title:  seen; trees appeared in the darkness like great black phantoms
Title:  chasing one another.  Milady shuddered.
Title:  
Title:  "But we are no longer in the city, sir," said she.
Title:  
Title:  The young officer preserved silence.
Title:  
Title:  "I beg you to understand, sir, I will go no farther unless you
Title:  tell me whither you are taking me."
Title:  
Title:  This threat brought no reply.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, this is too much," cried Milady.  "Help! help!"
Title:  
Title:  No voice replied to hers; the carriage continued to roll on with
Title:  rapidity; the officer seemed a statue.
Title:  
Title:  Milady looked at the officer with one of those terrible
Title:  expressions peculiar to her countenance, and which so rarely
Title:  failed of their effect; anger made her eyes flash in the
Title:  darkness.
Title:  
Title:  The young man remained immovable.
Title:  
Title:  Milady tried to open the door in order to throw herself out.
Title:  
Title:  "Take care, madame," said the young man, coolly, "you will kill
Title:  yourself in jumping."
Title:  
Title:  Milady reseated herself, foaming.  The officer leaned forward,
Title:  looked at her in his turn, and appeared surprised to see that
Title:  face, just before so beautiful, distorted with passion and almost
Title:  hideous.  The artful creature at once comprehended that she was
Title:  injuring herself by allowing him thus to read her soul; she
Title:  collected her features, and in a complaining voice said:  "In the
Title:  name of heaven, sir, tell me if it is to you, if it is to your
Title:  government, if it is to an enemy I am to attribute the violence
Title:  that is done me?"
Title:  
Title:  "No violence will be offered to you, madame, and what happens to
Title:  you is the result of a very simple measure which we are obliged
Title:  to adopt with all who land in England."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you don't know me, sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is the first time I have had the honor of seeing you."
Title:  
Title:  "And on your honor, you have no cause of hatred against me?"
Title:  
Title:  "None, I swear to you."
Title:  
Title:  There was so much serenity, coolness, mildness even, in the voice
Title:  of the young man, that Milady felt reassured.
Title:  
Title:  At length after a journey of nearly an hour, the carriage stopped
Title:  before an iron gate, which closed an avenue leading to a castle
Title:  severe in form, massive, and isolated.  Then, as the wheels
Title:  rolled over a fine gravel, Milady could hear a vast roaring,
Title:  which she at once recognized as the noise of the sea dashing
Title:  against some steep cliff.
Title:  
Title:  The carriage passed under two arched gateways, and at length
Title:  stopped in a court large, dark, and square.  Almost immediately
Title:  the door of the carriage was opened, the young man sprang lightly
Title:  out and presented his hand to Milady, who leaned upon it, and in
Title:  her turn alighted with tolerable calmness.
Title:  
Title:  "Still, then, I am a prisoner," said Milady, looking around her,
Title:  and bringing back her eyes with a most gracious smile to the
Title:  young officer; "but I feel assured it will not be for long,"
Title:  added she.  "My own conscience and your politeness, sir, are the
Title:  guarantees of that."
Title:  
Title:  However flattering this compliment, the officer made no reply;
Title:  but drawing from his belt a little silver whistle, such as
Title:  boatswains use in ships of war, he whistled three times, with
Title:  three different modulations.  Immediately several men appeared,
Title:  who unharnessed the smoking horses, and put the carriage into a
Title:  coach house.
Title:  
Title:  Then the officer, with the same calm politeness, invited his
Title:  prisoner to enter the house.  She, with a still-smiling
Title:  countenance, took his arm, and passed with him under a low arched
Title:  door, which by a vaulted passage, lighted only at the farther
Title:  end, led to a stone staircase around an angle of stone.  They
Title:  then came to a massive door, which after the introduction into
Title:  the lock of a key which the young man carried with him, turned
Title:  heavily upon its hinges, and disclosed the chamber destined for
Title:  Milady.
Title:  
Title:  With a single glance the prisoner took in the apartment in its
Title:  minutest details.  It was a chamber whose furniture was at once
Title:  appropriate for a prisoner or a free man; and yet bars at the
Title:  windows and outside bolts at the door decided the question in
Title:  favor of the prison.
Title:  
Title:  In an instant all the strength of mind of this creature, though
Title:  drawn from the most vigorous sources, abandoned her; she sank
Title:  into a large easy chair, with her arms crossed, her head lowered,
Title:  and expecting every instant to see a judge enter to interrogate
Title:  her.
Title:  
Title:  But no one entered except two or three marines, who brought her
Title:  trunks and packages, deposited them in a corner, and retired
Title:  without speaking.
Title:  
Title:  The officer superintended all these details with the same
Title:  calmness Milady had constantly seen in him, never pronouncing a
Title:  word himself, and making himself obeyed by a gesture of his hand
Title:  or a sound of his whistle.
Title:  
Title:  It might have been said that between this man and his inferiors
Title:  spoken language did not exist, or had become useless.
Title:  
Title:  At length Milady could hold out no longer; she broke the silence.
Title:  "In the name of heaven, sir," cried she, "what means all that is
Title:  passing?  Put an end to my doubts; I have courage enough for any
Title:  danger I can foresee, for every misfortune which I understand.
Title:  Where am I, and why am I here?  If I am free, why these bars and
Title:  these doors?  If I am a prisoner, what crime have I committed?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are here in the apartment destined for you, madame.  I
Title:  received orders to go and take charge of you on the sea, and to
Title:  conduct you to this castle.  This order I believe I have
Title:  accomplished with all the exactness of a soldier, but also with
Title:  the courtesy of a gentleman.  There terminates, at least to the
Title:  present moment, the duty I had to fulfill toward you; the rest
Title:  concerns another person."
Title:  
Title:  "And who is that other person?" asked Milady, warmly.  "Can you
Title:  not tell me his name?"
Title:  
Title:  At the moment a great jingling of spurs was heard on the stairs.
Title:  Some voices passed and faded away, and the sound of a single
Title:  footstep approached the door.
Title:  
Title:  "That person is here, madame," said the officer, leaving the
Title:  entrance open, and drawing himself up in an attitude of respect.
Title:  
Title:  At the same time the door opened; a man appeared on the
Title:  threshold.  He was without a hat, carried a sword, and flourished
Title:  a handkerchief in his hand.
Title:  
Title:  Milady thought she recognized this shadow in the gloom; she
Title:  supported herself with one hand upon the arm of the chair, and
Title:  advanced her head as if to meet a certainty.
Title:  
Title:  The stranger advanced slowly, and as he advanced, after entering
Title:  into the circle of light projected by the lamp, Milady
Title:  involuntarily drew back.
Title:  
Title:  Then when she had no longer any doubt, she cried, in a state of
Title:  stupor, "What, my brother, is it you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, fair lady!" replied Lord de Winter, making a bow, half
Title:  courteous, half ironical; "it is I, myself."
Title:  
Title:  "But this castle, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Is mine."
Title:  
Title:  "This chamber?"
Title:  
Title:  "Is yours."
Title:  
Title:  "I am, then, your prisoner?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nearly so."
Title:  
Title:  "But this is a frightful abuse of power!"
Title:  
Title:  "No high-sounding words!  Let us sit down and chat quietly, as
Title:  brother and sister ought to do."
Title:  
Title:  Then, turning toward the door, and seeing that the young officer
Title:  was waiting for his last orders, he said.  "All is well, I thank
Title:  you; now leave us alone, Mr. Felton."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  50  CHAT BETWEEN BROTHER AND SISTER
Title:  
Title:  During the time which Lord de Winter took to shut the door, close
Title:  a shutter, and draw a chair near to his sister-in-law's fauteuil,
Title:  Milady, anxiously thoughtful, plunged her glance into the depths
Title:  of possibility, and discovered all the plan, of which she could
Title:  not even obtain a glance as long as she was ignorant into whose
Title:  hands she had fallen.  She knew her brother-in-law to be a worthy
Title:  gentleman, a bold hunter, an intrepid player, enterprising with
Title:  women, but by no means remarkable for his skill in intrigues.
Title:  How had he discovered her arrival, and caused her to be seized?
Title:  Why did he detain her?
Title:  
Title:  Athos had dropped some words which proved that the conversation
Title:  she had with the cardinal had fallen into outside ears; but she
Title:  could not suppose that he had dug a countermine so promptly and
Title:  so boldly.  She rather feared that her preceding operations in
Title:  England might have been discovered.  Buckingham might have
Title:  guessed that it was she who had cut off the two studs, and avenge
Title:  himself for that little treachery; but Buckingham was incapable
Title:  of going to any excess against a woman, particularly if that
Title:  woman was supposed to have acted from a feeling of jealousy.
Title:  
Title:  This supposition appeared to her most reasonable.  It seemed to
Title:  her that they wanted to revenge the past, and not to anticipate
Title:  the future.  At all events, she congratulated herself upon having
Title:  fallen into the hands of her brother-in-law, with whom she
Title:  reckoned she could deal very easily, rather than into the hands
Title:  of an acknowledged and intelligent enemy.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, let us chat, brother," said she, with a kind of
Title:  cheerfulness, decided as she was to draw from the conversation,
Title:  in spite of all the dissimulation Lord de Winter could bring, the
Title:  revelations of which she stood in need to regulate her future
Title:  conduct.
Title:  
Title:  "You have, then, decided to come to England again," said Lord de
Title:  Winter, "in spite of the resolutions you so often expressed in
Title:  Paris never to set your feet on British ground?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady replied to this question by another question.  "To begin
Title:  with, tell me," said she, "how have you watched me so closely as
Title:  to be aware beforehand not only of my arrival, but even of the
Title:  day, the hour, and the port at which I should arrive?"
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter adopted the same tactics as Milady, thinking that
Title:  as his sister-in-law employed them they must be the best.
Title:  
Title:  "But tell me, my dear sister," replied he, "what makes you come
Title:  to England?"
Title:  
Title:  "I come to see you," replied Milady, without knowing how much she
Title:  aggravated by this reply the suspicions to which d'Artagnan's
Title:  letter had given birth in the mind of her brother-in-law, and
Title:  only desiring to gain the good will of her auditor by a
Title:  falsehood.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, to see me?" said de Winter, cunningly.
Title:  
Title:  "To be sure, to see you.  What is there astonishing in that?"
Title:  
Title:  "And you had no other object in coming to England but to see me?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "So it was for me alone you have taken the trouble to cross the
Title:  Channel?"
Title:  
Title:  "For you alone."
Title:  
Title:  "The deuce!  What tenderness, my sister!"
Title:  
Title:  "But am I not your nearest relative?" demanded Milady, with a
Title:  tone of the most touching ingenuousness.
Title:  
Title:  "And my only heir, are you not?" said Lord de Winter in his turn,
Title:  fixing his eyes on those of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  Whatever command she had over herself, Milady could not help
Title:  starting; and as in pronouncing the last words Lord de Winter
Title:  placed his hand upon the arm of his sister, this start did not
Title:  escape him.
Title:  
Title:  In fact, the blow was direct and severe.  The first idea that
Title:  occurred to Milady's mind was that she had been betrayed by
Title:  Kitty, and that she had recounted to the baron the selfish
Title:  aversion toward himself of which she had imprudently allowed some
Title:  marks to escape before her servant.  She also recollected the
Title:  furious and imprudent attack she had made upon d'Artagnan when he
Title:  spared the life of her brother.
Title:  
Title:  "I do not understand, my Lord," said she, in order to gain time
Title:  and make her adversary speak out.  "What do you mean to say?  Is
Title:  there any secret meaning concealed beneath your words?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, no!" said Lord de Winter, with apparent good nature.
Title:  "You wish to see me, and you come to England.  I learn this
Title:  desire, or rather I suspect that you feel it; and in order to
Title:  spare you all the annoyances of a nocturnal arrival in a port and
Title:  all the fatigues of landing, I send one of my officers to meet
Title:  you, I place a carriage at his orders, and he brings you hither
Title:  to this castle, of which I am governor, whither I come every day,
Title:  and where, in order to satisfy our mutual desire of seeing each
Title:  other, I have prepared you a chamber.  What is there more
Title:  astonishing in all that I have said to you than in what you have
Title:  told me?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; what I think astonishing is that you should expect my
Title:  coming."
Title:  
Title:  "And yet that is the most simple thing in the world, my dear
Title:  sister.  Have you not observed that the captain of your little
Title:  vessel, on entering the roadstead, sent forward, in order to
Title:  obtain permission to enter the port, a little boat bearing his
Title:  logbook and the register of his voyagers?  I am commandant of the
Title:  port.  They brought me that book.  I recognized your name in it.
Title:  My heart told me what your mouth has just confirmed--that is to
Title:  say, with what view you have exposed yourself to the dangers of a
Title:  sea so perilous, or at least so troublesome at this moment--and I
Title:  sent my cutter to meet you.  You know the rest."
Title:  
Title:  Milady knew that Lord de Winter lied, and she was the more
Title:  alarmed.
Title:  
Title:  "My brother," continued she, "was not that my Lord Buckingham
Title:  whom I saw on the jetty this evening as we arrived?"
Title:  
Title:  "Himself.  Ah, I can understand how the sight of him struck you,"
Title:  replied Lord de Winter.  "You came from a country where he must
Title:  be very much talked of, and I know that his armaments against
Title:  France greatly engage the attention of your friend the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "My friend the cardinal!" cried Milady, seeing that on this point
Title:  as on the other Lord de Winter seemed well instructed.
Title:  
Title:  "Is he not your friend?" replied the baron, negligently.  "Ah,
Title:  pardon!  I thought so; but we will return to my Lord Duke
Title:  presently.  Let us not depart from the sentimental turn our
Title:  conversation had taken.  You came, you say, to see me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, I reply that you shall be served to the height of your
Title:  wishes, and that we shall see each other every day."
Title:  
Title:  "Am I, then, to remain here eternally?" demanded Milady, with a
Title:  certain terror.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you find yourself badly lodged, sister?  Demand anything you
Title:  want, and I will hasten to have you furnished with it."
Title:  
Title:  "But I have neither my women nor my servants."
Title:  
Title:  "You shall have all, madame.  Tell me on what footing your
Title:  household was established by your first husband, and although I
Title:  am only your brother-in-law, I will arrange one similar."
Title:  
Title:  "My first husband!" cried Milady, looking at Lord de Winter with
Title:  eyes almost starting from their sockets.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, your French husband.  I don't speak of my brother.  If you
Title:  have forgotten, as he is still living, I can write to him and he
Title:  will send me information on the subject."
Title:  
Title:  A cold sweat burst from the brow of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "You jest!" said she, in a hollow voice.
Title:  
Title:  "Do I look so?" asked the baron, rising and going a step
Title:  backward.
Title:  
Title:  "Or rather you insult me," continued she, pressing with her
Title:  stiffened hands the two arms of her easy chair, and raising
Title:  herself upon her wrists.
Title:  
Title:  "I insult you!" said Lord de Winter, with contempt.  "In truth,
Title:  madame, do you think that can be possible?"
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed, sir," said Milady, "you must be either drunk or mad.
Title:  Leave the room, and send me a woman."
Title:  
Title:  "Women are very indiscreet, my sister.  Cannot I serve you as a
Title:  waiting maid?  By that means all our secrets will remain in the
Title:  family."
Title:  
Title:  "Insolent!" cried Milady; and as if acted upon by a spring, she
Title:  bounded toward the baron, who awaited her attack with his arms
Title:  crossed, but nevertheless with one hand on the hilt of his sword.
Title:  
Title:  "Come!" said he. "I know you are accustomed to assassinate
Title:  people; but I warn you I shall defend myself, even against you."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right," said Milady.  "You have all the appearance of
Title:  being cowardly enough to lift your hand against a woman."
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps so; and I have an excuse, for mine would not be the
Title:  first hand of a man that has been placed upon you, I imagine."
Title:  
Title:  And the baron pointed, with a slow and accusing gesture, to the
Title:  left shoulder of Milady, which he almost touched with his finger.
Title:  
Title:  Milady uttered a deep, inward shriek, and retreated to a corner
Title:  of the room like a panther which crouches for a spring.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, growl as much as you please," cried Lord de Winter, "but
Title:  don't try to bite, for I warn you that it would be to your
Title:  disadvantage.  There are here no procurators who regulate
Title:  successions beforehand.  There is no knight-errant to come and
Title:  seek a quarrel with me on account of the fair lady I detain a
Title:  prisoner; but I have judges quite ready who will quickly dispose
Title:  of a woman so shameless as to glide, a bigamist, into the bed of
Title:  Lord de Winter, my brother.  And these judges, I warn you, will
Title:  soon send you to an executioner who will make both your shoulders
Title:  alike."
Title:  
Title:  The eyes of Milady darted such flashes that although he was a man
Title:  and armed before an unarmed woman, he felt the chill of fear
Title:  glide through his whole frame.  However, he continued all the
Title:  same, but with increasing warmth:  "Yes, I can very well
Title:  understand that after having inherited the fortune of my brother
Title:  it would be very agreeable to you to be my heir likewise; but
Title:  know beforehand, if you kill me or cause me to be killed, my
Title:  precautions are taken.  Not a penny of what I possess will pass
Title:  into your hands.  Were you not already rich enough--you who
Title:  possess nearly a million?  And could you not stop your fatal
Title:  career, if you did not do evil for the infinite and supreme joy
Title:  of doing it?  Oh, be assured, if the memory of my brother were
Title:  not sacred to me, you should rot in a state dungeon or satisfy
Title:  the curiosity of sailors at Tyburn.  I will be silent, but you
Title:  must endure your captivity quietly.  In fifteen or twenty days I
Title:  shall set out for La Rochelle with the army; but on the eve of my
Title:  departure a vessel which I shall see depart will take you hence
Title:  and convey you to our colonies in the south.  And be assured that
Title:  you shall be accompanied by one who will blow your brains out at
Title:  the first attempt you make to return to England or the
Title:  Continent."
Title:  
Title:  Milady listened with an attention that dilated her inflamed eyes.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, at present," continued Lord de Winter, "you will remain in
Title:  this castle.  The walls are thick, the doors strong, and the bars
Title:  solid; besides, your window opens immediately over the sea.  The
Title:  men of my crew, who are devoted to me for life and death, mount
Title:  guard around this apartment, and watch all the passages that lead
Title:  to the courtyard.  Even if you gained the yard, there would still
Title:  be three iron gates for you to pass.  The order is positive.  A
Title:  step, a gesture, a word, on your part, denoting an effort to
Title:  escape, and you are to be fired upon.  If they kill you, English
Title:  justice will be under an obligation to me for having saved it
Title:  trouble.  Ah! I see your features regain their calmness, your
Title:  countenance recovers its assurance.  You are saying to yourself:
Title:  'Fifteen days, twenty days?  Bah!  I have an inventive mind;
Title:  before that is expired some idea will occur to me.  I have an
Title:  infernal spirit.  I shall meet with a victim.  Before fifteen
Title:  days are gone by I shall be away from here.'  Ah, try it!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady, finding her thoughts betrayed, dug her nails into her
Title:  flesh to subdue every emotion that might give to her face any
Title:  expression except agony.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter continued:  "The officer who commands here in my
Title:  absence you have already seen, and therefore know him.  He knows
Title:  how, as you must have observed, to obey an order--for you did
Title:  not, I am sure, come from Portsmouth hither without endeavoring
Title:  to make him speak.  What do you say of him?  Could a statue of
Title:  marble have been more impassive and more mute?  You have already
Title:  tried the power of your seductions upon many men, and
Title:  unfortunately you have always succeeded; but I give you leave to
Title:  try them upon this one.  PARDIEU! if you succeed with him, I
Title:  pronounce you the demon himself."
Title:  
Title:  He went toward the door and opened it hastily.
Title:  
Title:  "Call Mr. Felton," said he. "Wait a minute longer, and I will
Title:  introduce him to you."
Title:  
Title:  There followed between these two personages a strange silence,
Title:  during which the sound of a slow and regular step was heard
Title:  approaching.  Shortly a human form appeared in the shade of the
Title:  corridor, and the young lieutenant, with whom we are already
Title:  acquainted, stopped at the threshold to receive the orders of the
Title:  baron.
Title:  
Title:  "Come in, my dear John," said Lord de Winter, "come in, and shut
Title:  the door."
Title:  
Title:  The young officer entered.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said the baron, "look at this woman.  She is young; she is
Title:  beautiful; she possesses all earthly seductions.  Well, she is a
Title:  monster, who, at twenty-five years of age, has been guilty of as
Title:  many crimes as you could read of in a year in the archives of our
Title:  tribunals.  Her voice prejudices her hearers in her favor; her
Title:  beauty serves as a bait to her victims; her body even pays what
Title:  she promises--I must do her that justice.  She will try to seduce
Title:  you, perhaps she will try to kill you.  I have extricated you
Title:  from misery, Felton; I have caused you to be named lieutenant; I
Title:  once saved your life, you know on what occasion.  I am for you
Title:  not only a protector, but a friend; not only a benefactor, but a
Title:  father.  This woman has come back again into England for the
Title:  purpose of conspiring against my life.  I hold this serpent in my
Title:  hands.  Well, I call you, and say to you:  Friend Felton, John,
Title:  my child, guard me, and more particularly guard yourself, against
Title:  this woman.  Swear, by your hopes of salvation, to keep her
Title:  safely for the chastisement she has merited.  John Felton, I
Title:  trust your word!  John Felton, I put faith in your loyalty!"
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord," said the young officer, summoning to his mild
Title:  countenance all the hatred he could find in his heart, "my Lord,
Title:  I swear all shall be done as you desire."
Title:  
Title:  Milady received this look like a resigned victim; it was
Title:  impossible to imagine a more submissive or a more mild expression
Title:  than that which prevailed on her beautiful countenance.  Lord de
Title:  Winter himself could scarcely recognize the tigress who, a minute
Title:  before, prepared apparently for a fight.
Title:  
Title:  "She is not to leave this chamber, understand, John," continued
Title:  the baron.  "She is to correspond with nobody; she is to speak to
Title:  no one but you--if you will do her the honor to address a word to
Title:  her."
Title:  
Title:  "That is sufficient, my Lord!  I have sworn."
Title:  
Title:  "And now, madame, try to make your peace with God, for you are
Title:  judged by men!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady let her head sink, as if crushed by this sentence.  Lord
Title:  de Winter went out, making a sign to Felton, who followed him,
Title:  shutting the door after him.
Title:  
Title:  One instant after, the heavy step of a marine who served as
Title:  sentinel was heard in the corridor--his ax in his girdle and his
Title:  musket on his shoulder.
Title:  
Title:  Milady remained for some minutes in the same position, for she
Title:  thought they might perhaps be examining her through the keyhole;
Title:  she then slowly raised her head, which had resumed its formidable
Title:  expression of menace and defiance, ran to the door to listen,
Title:  looked out of her window, and returning to bury herself again in
Title:  her large armchair, she reflected.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  51  OFFICER
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, the cardinal looked anxiously for news from England;
Title:  but no news arrived that was not annoying and threatening.
Title:  
Title:  Although La Rochelle was invested, however certain success might
Title:  appear--thanks to the precautions taken, and above all to the
Title:  dyke, which prevented the entrance of any vessel into the
Title:  besieged city--the blockade might last a long time yet.  This was
Title:  a great affront to the king's army, and a great inconvenience to
Title:  the cardinal, who had no longer, it is true, to embroil Louis
Title:  XIII with Anne of Austria--for that affair was over--but he had
Title:  to adjust matters for M. de Bassompierre, who was embroiled with
Title:  the Duc d'Angouleme.
Title:  
Title:  As to Monsieur, who had begun the siege, he left to the cardinal
Title:  the task of finishing it.
Title:  
Title:  The city, notwithstanding the incredible perseverance of its
Title:  mayor, had attempted a sort of mutiny for a surrender; the mayor
Title:  had hanged the mutineers.  This execution quieted the ill-
Title:  disposed, who resolved to allow themselves to die of hunger--this
Title:  death always appearing to them more slow and less sure than
Title:  strangulation.
Title:  
Title:  On their side, from time to time, the besiegers took the
Title:  messengers which the Rochellais sent to Buckingham, or the spies
Title:  which Buckingham sent to the Rochellais.  In one case or the
Title:  other, the trial was soon over.  The cardinal pronounced the
Title:  single word, "Hanged!"  The king was invited to come and see the
Title:  hanging.  He came languidly, placing himself in a good situation
Title:  to see all the details.  This amused him sometimes a little, and
Title:  made him endure the siege with patience; but it did not prevent
Title:  his getting very tired, or from talking at every moment of
Title:  returning to Paris--so that if the messengers and the spies had
Title:  failed, his Eminence, notwithstanding all his inventiveness,
Title:  would have found himself much embarrassed.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, time passed on, and the Rochellais did not
Title:  surrender.  The last spy that was taken was the bearer of a
Title:  letter.  This letter told Buckingham that the city was at an
Title:  extremity; but instead of adding, "If your succor does not arrive
Title:  within fifteen days, we will surrender," it added, quite simply,
Title:  "If your succor comes not within fifteen days, we shall all be
Title:  dead with hunger when it comes."
Title:  
Title:  The Rochellais, then, had no hope but in Buckingham.  Buckingham
Title:  was their Messiah.  It was evident that if they one day learned
Title:  positively that they must not count on Buckingham, their courage
Title:  would fail with their hope.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal looked, then, with great impatience for the news
Title:  from England which would announce to him that Buckingham would
Title:  not come.
Title:  
Title:  The question of carrying the city by assault, though often
Title:  debated in the council of the king, had been always rejected.  In
Title:  the first place, La Rochelle appeared impregnable.  Then the
Title:  cardinal, whatever he said, very well knew that the horror of
Title:  bloodshed in this encounter, in which Frenchman would combat
Title:  against Frenchman, was a retrograde movement of sixty years
Title:  impressed upon his policy; and the cardinal was at that period
Title:  what we now call a man of progress.  In fact, the sack of La
Title:  Rochelle, and the assassination of three of four thousand
Title:  Huguenots who allowed themselves to be killed, would resemble too
Title:  closely, in 1628, the massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572; and
Title:  then, above all this, this extreme measure, which was not at all
Title:  repugnant to the king, good Catholic as he was, always fell
Title:  before this argument of the besieging generals--La Rochelle is
Title:  impregnable except to famine.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear he
Title:  entertained of his terrible emissary--for he comprehended the
Title:  strange qualities of this woman, sometimes a serpent, sometimes a
Title:  lion.  Had she betrayed him?  Was she dead?  He knew her well
Title:  enough in all cases to know that, whether acting for or against
Title:  him, as a friend or an enemy, she would not remain motionless
Title:  without great impediments; but whence did these impediments
Title:  arise?  That was what he could not know.
Title:  
Title:  And yet he reckoned, and with reason, on Milady.  He had divined
Title:  in the past of this woman terrible things which his red mantle
Title:  alone could cover; and he felt, from one cause or another, that
Title:  this woman was his own, as she could look to no other but himself
Title:  for a support superior to the danger which threatened her.
Title:  
Title:  He resolved, then, to carry on the war alone, and to look for no
Title:  success foreign to himself, but as we look for a fortunate
Title:  chance.  He continued to press the raising of the famous dyke
Title:  which was to starve La Rochelle.  Meanwhile, he cast his eyes
Title:  over that unfortunate city, which contained so much deep misery
Title:  and so many heroic virtues, and recalling the saying of Louis XI,
Title:  his political predecessor, as he himself was the predecessor of
Title:  Robespierre, he repeated this maxim of Tristan's gossip:  "Divide
Title:  in order to reign."
Title:  
Title:  Henry IV, when besieging Paris, had loaves and provisions thrown
Title:  over the walls.  The cardinal had little notes thrown over in
Title:  which he represented to the Rochellais how unjust, selfish, and
Title:  barbarous was the conduct of their leaders.  These leaders had
Title:  corn in abundance, and would not let them partake of it; they
Title:  adopted as a maxim--for they, too, had maxims--that it was of
Title:  very little consequence that women, children, and old men should
Title:  die, so long as the men who were to defend the walls remained
Title:  strong and healthy.  Up to that time, whether from devotedness or
Title:  from want of power to act against it, this maxim, without being
Title:  generally adopted, nevertheless passed from theory into practice;
Title:  but the notes did it injury.  The notes reminded the men that the
Title:  children, women, and old men whom they allowed to die were their
Title:  sons, their wives, and their fathers, and that it would be more
Title:  just for everyone to be reduced to the common misery, in order
Title:  that equal conditions should give birth to unanimous resolutions.
Title:  
Title:  These notes had all the effect that he who wrote them could
Title:  expect, in that they induced a great number of the inhabitants to
Title:  open private negotiations with the royal army.
Title:  
Title:  But at the moment when the cardinal saw his means already
Title:  bearing fruit, and applauded himself for having put it in action, an
Title:  inhabitant of La Rochelle who had contrived to pass the royal
Title:  lines--God knows how, such was the watchfulness of Bassompierre,
Title:  Schomberg, and the Duc d'Angouleme, themselves watched over by
Title:  the cardinal--an inhabitant of La Rochelle, we say, entered the
Title:  city, coming from Portsmouth, and saying that he had seen a
Title:  magnificent fleet ready to sail within eight days.  Still
Title:  further, Buckingham announced to the mayor that at length the
Title:  great league was about to declare itself against France, and that
Title:  the kingdom would be at once invaded by the English, Imperial,
Title:  and Spanish armies.  This letter was read publicly in all parts
Title:  of the city.  Copies were put up at the corners of the streets;
Title:  and even they who had begun to open negotiations interrupted
Title:  them, being resolved to await the succor so pompously announced.
Title:  
Title:  This unexpected circumstance brought back Richelieu's former
Title:  anxiety, and forced him in spite of himself once more to turn his
Title:  eyes to the other side of the sea.
Title:  
Title:  During this time, exempt from the anxiety of its only and true
Title:  chief, the royal army led a joyous life, neither provisions nor
Title:  money being wanting in the camp.  All the corps rivaled one
Title:  another in audacity and gaiety.  To take spies and hang them, to
Title:  make hazardous expeditions upon the dyke or the sea, to imagine
Title:  wild plans, and to execute them coolly--such were the pastimes
Title:  which made the army find these days short which were not only so
Title:  long to the Rochellais, a prey to famine and anxiety, but even to
Title:  the cardinal, who blockaded them so closely.
Title:  
Title:  Sometimes when the cardinal, always on horseback, like the lowest
Title:  GENDARME of the army, cast a pensive glance over those works, so
Title:  slowly keeping pace with his wishes, which the engineers, brought
Title:  from all the corners of France, were executing under his orders,
Title:  if he met a Musketeer of the company of Treville, he drew near
Title:  and looked at him in a peculiar manner, and not recognizing in
Title:  him one of our four companions, he turned his penetrating look
Title:  and profound thoughts in another direction.
Title:  
Title:  One day when oppressed with a mortal weariness of mind, without
Title:  hope in the negotiations with the city, without news from
Title:  England, the cardinal went out, without any other aim than to be
Title:  out of doors, and accompanied only by Cahusac and La Houdiniere,
Title:  strolled along the beach.  Mingling the immensity of his dreams
Title:  with the immensity of the ocean, he came, his horse going at a
Title:  foot's pace, to a hill from the top of which he perceived behind
Title:  a hedge, reclining on the sand and catching in its passage one of
Title:  those rays of the sun so rare at this period of the year, seven
Title:  men surrounded by empty bottles.  Four of these men were our
Title:  Musketeers, preparing to listen to a letter one of them had just
Title:  received.  This letter was so important that it made them forsake
Title:  their cards and their dice on the drumhead.
Title:  
Title:  The other three were occupied in opening an enormous flagon of
Title:  Collicure wine; these were the lackeys of these gentlemen.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal was, as we have said, in very low spirits; and
Title:  nothing when he was in that state of mind increased his
Title:  depression so much as gaiety in others.  Besides, he had another
Title:  strange fancy, which was always to believe that the causes of his
Title:  sadness created the gaiety of others.  Making a sign to La
Title:  Houdiniere and Cahusac to stop, he alighted from his horse, and
Title:  went toward these suspected merry companions, hoping, by means of
Title:  the sand which deadened the sound of his steps and of the hedge
Title:  which concealed his approach, to catch some words of this
Title:  conversation which appeared so interesting.  At ten paces from
Title:  the hedge he recognized the talkative Gascon; and as he had
Title:  already perceived that these men were Musketeers, he did not
Title:  doubt that the three others were those called the Inseparables;
Title:  that is to say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  It may be supposed that his desire to hear the conversation was
Title:  augmented by this discovery.  His eyes took a strange expression,
Title:  and with the step of a tiger-cat he advanced toward the hedge;
Title:  but he had not been able to catch more than a few vague syllables
Title:  without any positive sense, when a sonorous and short cry made
Title:  him start, and attracted the attention of the Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  "Officer!" cried Grimaud.
Title:  
Title:  "You are speaking, you scoundrel!" said Athos, rising upon his
Title:  elbow, and transfixing Grimaud with his flaming look.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech, but contented
Title:  himself with pointing his index finger in the direction of the
Title:  hedge, announcing by this gesture the cardinal and his escort.
Title:  
Title:  With a single bound the Musketeers were on their feet, and
Title:  saluted with respect.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal seemed furious.
Title:  
Title:  "It appears that Messieurs the Musketeers keep guard," said he.
Title:  "Are the English expected by land, or do the Musketeers consider
Title:  themselves superior officers?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," replied Athos, for amid the general fright he
Title:  alone had preserved the noble calmness and coolness that never
Title:  forsook him, "Monseigneur, the Musketeers, when they are not on
Title:  duty, or when their duty is over, drink and play at dice, and
Title:  they are certainly superior officers to their lackeys."
Title:  
Title:  "Lackeys?" grumbled the cardinal.  "Lackeys who have the order to
Title:  warn their masters when anyone passes are not lackeys, they are
Title:  sentinels."
Title:  
Title:  "Your Eminence may perceive that if we had not taken this
Title:  precaution, we should have been exposed to allowing you to pass
Title:  without presenting you our respects or offering you our thanks
Title:  for the favor you have done us in uniting us.  D'Artagnan,"
Title:  continued Athos, "you, who but lately were so anxious for such an
Title:  opportunity for expressing your gratitude to Monseigneur, here it
Title:  is; avail yourself of it."
Title:  
Title:  These words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm which
Title:  distinguished Athos in the hour of danger, and with that
Title:  excessive politeness which made of him at certain moments a king
Title:  more majestic than kings by birth.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan came forward and stammered out a few words of
Title:  gratitude which soon expired under the gloomy looks of the
Title:  cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "It does not signify, gentlemen," continued the cardinal, without
Title:  appearing to be in the least swerved from his first intention by
Title:  the diversion which Athos had started, "it does not signify,
Title:  gentlemen.  I do not like to have simple soldiers, because they
Title:  have the advantage of serving in a privileged corps, thus to play
Title:  the great lords; discipline is the same for them as for everybody
Title:  else."
Title:  
Title:  Athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely, and
Title:  bowed in sign of assent.  Then he resumed in his turn:
Title:  "Discipline, Monseigneur, has, I hope, in no way been forgotten
Title:  by us.  We are not on duty, and we believed that not being on
Title:  duty we were at liberty to dispose of our time as we pleased.  If
Title:  we are so fortunate as to have some particular duty to perform
Title:  for your Eminence, we are ready to obey you.  Your Eminence may
Title:  perceive," continued Athos, knitting his brow, for this sort of
Title:  investigation began to annoy him, "that we have not come out
Title:  without our arms."
Title:  
Title:  And he showed the cardinal, with his finger, the four muskets
Title:  piled near the drum, on which were the cards and dice.
Title:  
Title:  "Your Eminence may believe," added d'Artagnan, "that we would
Title:  have come to meet you, if we could have supposed it was
Title:  Monseigneur coming toward us with so few attendants."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal bit his mustache, and even his lips a little.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know what you look like, all together, as you are armed
Title:  and guarded by your lackeys?" said the cardinal.  "You look like
Title:  four conspirators."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, as to that, Monseigneur, it is true," said Athos; "we do
Title:  conspire, as your Eminence might have seen the other morning.
Title:  Only we conspire against the Rochellais."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you gentlemen of policy!" replied the cardinal, knitting his
Title:  brow in his turn, "the secret of many unknown things might
Title:  perhaps be found in your brains, if we could read them as you
Title:  read that letter which you concealed as soon as you saw me
Title:  coming."
Title:  
Title:  The color mounted to the face of Athos, and he made a step toward
Title:  his Eminence.
Title:  
Title:  "One might think you really suspected us, monseigneur, and we
Title:  were undergoing a real interrogatory.  If it be so, we trust your
Title:  Eminence will deign to explain yourself, and we should then at
Title:  least be acquainted with our real position."
Title:  
Title:  "And if it were an interrogatory!" replied the cardinal.  "Others
Title:  besides you have undergone such, Monsieur Athos, and have replied
Title:  thereto."
Title:  
Title:  "Thus I have told your Eminence that you had but to question us,
Title:  and we are ready to reply."
Title:  
Title:  "What was that letter you were about to read, Monsieur Aramis,
Title:  and which you so promptly concealed?"
Title:  
Title:  "A woman's letter, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, yes, I see," said the cardinal; "we must be discreet with
Title:  this sort of letters; but nevertheless, we may show them to a
Title:  confessor, and you know I have taken orders."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," said Athos, with a calmness the more terrible
Title:  because he risked his head in making this reply, "the letter is a
Title:  woman's letter, but it is neither signed Marion de Lorme, nor
Title:  Madame d'Aiguillon."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal became as pale as death; lightning darted from his
Title:  eyes.  He turned round as if to give an order to Cahusac and
Title:  Houdiniere.  Athos saw the movement; he made a step toward the
Title:  muskets, upon which the other three friends had fixed their eyes,
Title:  like men ill-disposed to allow themselves to be taken.  The
Title:  cardinalists were three; the Musketeers, lackeys included, were
Title:  seven.  He judged that the match would be so much the less equal,
Title:  if Athos and his companions were really plotting; and by one of
Title:  those rapid turns which he always had at command, all his anger
Title:  faded away into a smile.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, well!" said he, "you are brave young men, proud in
Title:  daylight, faithful in darkness.  We can find no fault with you
Title:  for watching over yourselves, when you watch so carefully over
Title:  others.  Gentlemen, I have not forgotten the night in which you
Title:  served me as an escort to the Red Dovecot.  If there were any
Title:  danger to be apprehended on the road I am going, I would request
Title:  you to accompany me; but as there is none, remain where you are,
Title:  finish your bottles, your game, and your letter.  Adieu,
Title:  gentlemen!"
Title:  
Title:  And remounting his horse, which Cahusac led to him, he saluted
Title:  them with his hand, and rode away.
Title:  
Title:  The four young men, standing and motionless, followed him with
Title:  their eyes without speaking a single word until he had
Title:  disappeared.  Then they looked at one another.
Title:  
Title:  The countenances of all gave evidence of terror, for
Title:  notwithstanding the friendly adieu of his Eminence, they plainly
Title:  perceived that the cardinal went away with rage in his heart.
Title:  
Title:  Athos alone smiled, with a self-possessed, disdainful smile.
Title:  
Title:  When the cardinal was out of hearing and sight, "That Grimaud
Title:  kept bad watch!" cried Porthos, who had a great inclination to
Title:  vent his ill-humor on somebody.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud was about to reply to excuse himself.  Athos lifted his
Title:  finger, and Grimaud was silent.
Title:  
Title:  "Would you have given up the letter, Aramis?" said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I," said Aramis, in his most flutelike tone, "I had made up my
Title:  mind.  If he had insisted upon the letter being given up to him,
Title:  I would have presented the letter to him with one hand, and with
Title:  the other I would have run my sword through his body."
Title:  
Title:  "I expected as much," said Athos; "and that was why I threw
Title:  myself between you and him.  Indeed, this man is very much to
Title:  blame for talking thus to other men; one would say he had never
Title:  had to do with any but women and children."
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Athos, I admire you, but nevertheless we were in the
Title:  wrong, after all."
Title:  
Title:  "How, in the wrong?" said Athos.  "Whose, then, is the air we
Title:  breathe?  Whose is the ocean upon which we look?  Whose is the
Title:  sand upon which we were reclining?  Whose is that letter of your
Title:  mistress?  Do these belong to the cardinal?  Upon my honor, this
Title:  man fancies the world belongs to him.  There you stood,
Title:  stammering, stupefied, annihilated.  One might have supposed the
Title:  Bastille appeared before you, and that the gigantic Medusa had
Title:  converted you into stone.  Is being in love conspiring?  You are
Title:  in love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up,
Title:  and you wish to get her out of the hands of the cardinal.  That's
Title:  a match you are playing with his Eminence; this letter is your
Title:  game.  Why should you expose your game to your adversary?  That
Title:  is never done.  Let him find it out if he can!  We can find out
Title:  his!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, that's all very sensible, Athos," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "In that case, let there be no more question of what's past, and
Title:  let Aramis resume the letter from his cousin where the cardinal
Title:  interrupted him."
Title:  
Title:  Aramis drew the letter from his pocket; the three friends
Title:  surrounded him, and the three lackeys grouped themselves again
Title:  near the wine jar.
Title:  
Title:  "You had only read a line or two," said d'Artagnan; "read the
Title:  letter again from the commencement."
Title:  
Title:  "Willingly," said Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "My dear Cousin, I think I shall make up my mind to set out for
Title:  Bethune, where my sister has placed our little servant in the
Title:  convent of the Carmelites; this poor child is quite resigned, as
Title:  she knows she cannot live elsewhere without the salvation of her
Title:  soul being in danger.  Nevertheless, if the affairs of our family
Title:  are arranged, as we hope they will be, I believe she will run the
Title:  risk of being damned, and will return to those she regrets,
Title:  particularly as she knows they are always thinking of her.
Title:  Meanwhile, she is not very wretched; what she most desires is a
Title:  letter from her intended.  I know that such viands pass with
Title:  difficulty through convent gratings; but after all, as I have
Title:  given you proofs, my dear cousin, I am not unskilled in such
Title:  affairs, and I will take charge of the commission.  My sister
Title:  thanks you for your good and eternal remembrance.  She has
Title:  experienced much anxiety; but she is now at length a little
Title:  reassured, having sent her secretary away in order that nothing
Title:  may happen unexpectedly.
Title:  
Title:  "Adieu, my dear cousin.  Tell us news of yourself as often as you
Title:  can; that is to say, as often as you can with safety.  I embrace
Title:  you.
Title:  
Title:  "Marie Michon."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, what do I not owe you, Aramis?" said d'Artagnan.  "Dear
Title:  Constance!  I have at length, then, intelligence of you.  She
Title:  lives; she is in safety in a convent; she is at Bethune!  Where
Title:  is Bethune, Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, upon the frontiers of Artois and of Flanders.  The siege
Title:  once over, we shall be able to make a tour in that direction."
Title:  
Title:  "And that will not be long, it is to be hoped," said Porthos;
Title:  "for they have this morning hanged a spy who confessed that the
Title:  Rochellais were reduced to the leather of their shoes.  Supposing
Title:  that after having eaten the leather they eat the soles, I cannot
Title:  see much that is left unless they eat one another."
Title:  
Title:  "Poor fools!" said Athos, emptying a glass of excellent Bordeaux
Title:  wine which, without having at that period the reputation it now
Title:  enjoys, merited it no less, "poor fools!  As if the Catholic
Title:  religion was not the most advantageous and the most agreeable of
Title:  all religions!  All the same," resumed he, after having clicked
Title:  his tongue against his palate, "they are brave fellows!  But what
Title:  the devil are you about, Aramis?" continued Athos.  "Why, you are
Title:  squeezing that letter into your pocket!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said d'Artagnan, "Athos is right, it must be burned.  And
Title:  yet if we burn it, who knows whether Monsieur Cardinal has not a
Title:  secret to interrogate ashes?"
Title:  
Title:  "He must have one," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "What will you do with the letter, then?" asked Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "Come here, Grimaud," said Athos.  Grimaud rose and obeyed.  "As
Title:  a punishment for having spoken without permission, my friend, you
Title:  will please to eat this piece of paper; then to recompense you
Title:  for the service you will have rendered us, you shall afterward
Title:  drink this glass of wine.  First, here is the letter.  Eat
Title:  heartily."
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud smiled; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass which
Title:  Athos held in his hand, he ground the paper well between his
Title:  teeth and then swallowed it.
Title:  
Title:  "Bravo, Monsieur Grimaud!" said Athos; "and now take this.
Title:  That's well.  We dispense with your saying grace."
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud silently swallowed the glass of Bordeaux wine; but his
Title:  eyes, raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation,
Title:  spoke a language which, though mute, was not the less expressive.
Title:  
Title:  "And now," said Athos, "unless Monsieur Cardinal should form the
Title:  ingenious idea of ripping up Grimaud, I think we may be pretty
Title:  much at our ease respecting the letter."
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, his Eminence continued his melancholy ride, murmuring
Title:  between his mustaches, "These four men must positively be mine."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  52  CAPTIVITY:  THE FIRST DAY
Title:  
Title:  Let us return to Milady, whom a glance thrown upon the coast of
Title:  France has made us lose sight of for an instant.
Title:  
Title:  We shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we
Title:  left her, plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection--a dark hell
Title:  at the gate of which she has almost left hope behind, because for
Title:  the first time she doubts, for the first time she fears.
Title:  
Title:  On two occasions her fortune has failed her, on two occasions she
Title:  has found herself discovered and betrayed; and on these two
Title:  occasions it was to one fatal genius, sent doubtlessly by the
Title:  Lord to combat her, that she has succumbed.  D'Artagnan has
Title:  conquered her--her, that invincible power of evil.
Title:  
Title:  He has deceived her in her love, humbled her in her pride,
Title:  thwarted her in her ambition; and now he ruins her fortune,
Title:  deprives her of liberty, and even threatens her life.  Still
Title:  more, he has lifted the corner of her mask--that shield with
Title:  which she covered herself and which rendered her so strong.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan has turned aside from Buckingham, whom she hates as
Title:  she hates everyone she has loved, the tempest with which
Title:  Richelieu threatened him in the person of the queen.  D'Artagnan
Title:  had passed himself upon her as de Wardes, for whom she had
Title:  conceived one of those tigerlike fancies common to women of her
Title:  character.  D'Artagnan knows that terrible secret which she has
Title:  sworn no one shall know without dying.  In short, at the moment
Title:  in which she has just obtained from Richelieu a carte blanche by
Title:  the means of which she is about to take vengeance on her enemy,
Title:  this precious paper is torn from her hands, and it is d'Artagnan
Title:  who holds her prisoner and is about to send her to some filthy
Title:  Botany Bay, some infamous Tyburn of the Indian Ocean.
Title:  
Title:  All this she owes to d'Artagnan, without doubt.  From whom can
Title:  come so many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him?  He
Title:  alone could have transmitted to Lord de Winter all these
Title:  frightful secrets which he has discovered, one after another, by
Title:  a train of fatalities.  He knows her brother-in-law.  He must
Title:  have written to him.
Title:  
Title:  What hatred she distills!  Motionless, with her burning and fixed
Title:  glances, in her solitary apartment, how well the outbursts of
Title:  passion which at times escape from the depths of her chest with
Title:  her respiration, accompany the sound of the surf which rises,
Title:  growls, roars, and breaks itself like an eternal and powerless
Title:  despair against the rocks on which is built this dark and lofty
Title:  castle!  How many magnificent projects of vengeance she conceives
Title:  by the light of the flashes which her tempestuous passion casts
Title:  over her mind against Mme. Bonacieux, against Buckingham, but
Title:  above all against d'Artagnan--projects lost in the distance of
Title:  the future.
Title:  
Title:  Yes; but in order to avenge herself she must be free.  And to be
Title:  free, a prisoner has to pierce a wall, detach bars, cut through a
Title:  floor--all undertakings which a patient and strong man may
Title:  accomplish, but before which the feverish irritations of a woman
Title:  must give way.  Besides, to do all this, time is necessary--
Title:  months, years; and she has ten or twelve days, as Lord de Winter,
Title:  her fraternal and terrible jailer, has told her.
Title:  
Title:  And yet, if she were a man she would attempt all this, and
Title:  perhaps might succeed; why, then, did heaven make the mistake of
Title:  placing that manlike soul in that frail and delicate body?
Title:  
Title:  The first moments of her captivity were terrible; a few
Title:  convulsions of rage which she could not suppress paid her debt of
Title:  feminine weakness to nature.  But by degrees she overcame the
Title:  outbursts of her mad passion; and nervous tremblings which
Title:  agitated her frame disappeared, and she remained folded within
Title:  herself like a fatigued serpent in repose.
Title:  
Title:  "Go to, go to!  I must have been mad to allow myself to be
Title:  carried away so," says she, gazing into the glass, which reflects
Title:  back to her eyes the burning glance by which she appears to
Title:  interrogate herself.  "No violence; violence is the proof of
Title:  weakness.  In the first place, I have never succeeded by that
Title:  means.  Perhaps if I employed my strength against women I might
Title:  perchance find them weaker than myself, and consequently conquer
Title:  them; but it is with men that I struggle, and I am but a woman to
Title:  them.  Let me fight like a woman, then; my strength is in my
Title:  weakness."
Title:  
Title:  Then, as if to render an account to herself of the changes she
Title:  could place upon her countenance, so mobile and so expressive,
Title:  she made it take all expressions from that of passionate anger,
Title:  which convulsed her features, to that of the most sweet, most
Title:  affectionate, and most seducing smile.  Then her hair assumed
Title:  successively, under her skillful hands, all the undulations she
Title:  thought might assist the charms of her face.  At length she
Title:  murmured, satisfied with herself, "Come, nothing is lost; I am
Title:  still beautiful."
Title:  
Title:  It was then nearly eight o'clock in the evening.  Milady
Title:  perceived a bed; she calculated that the repose of a few hours
Title:  would not only refresh her head and her ideas, but still further,
Title:  her complexion.  A better idea, however, came into her mind
Title:  before going to bed.  She had heard something said about supper.
Title:  She had already been an hour in this apartment; they could not
Title:  long delay bringing her a repast.  The prisoner did not wish to
Title:  lose time; and she resolved to make that very evening some
Title:  attempts to ascertain the nature of the ground she had to work
Title:  upon, by studying the characters of the men to whose guardianship
Title:  she was committed.
Title:  
Title:  A light appeared under the door; this light announced the
Title:  reappearance of her jailers.  Milady, who had arisen, threw
Title:  herself quickly into the armchair, her head thrown back, her
Title:  beautiful hair unbound and disheveled, her bosom half bare
Title:  beneath her crumpled lace, one hand on her heart, and the other
Title:  hanging down.
Title:  
Title:  The bolts were drawn; the door groaned upon its hinges.  Steps
Title:  sounded in the chamber, and drew near.
Title:  
Title:  "Place that table there," said a voice which the prisoner
Title:  recognized as that of Felton.
Title:  
Title:  The order was executed.
Title:  
Title:  "You will bring lights, and relieve the sentinel," continued
Title:  Felton.
Title:  
Title:  And this double order which the young lieutenant gave to the same
Title:  individuals proved to Milady that her servants were the same men
Title:  as her guards; that is to say, soldiers.
Title:  
Title:  Felton's orders were, for the rest, executed with a silent
Title:  rapidity that gave a good idea of the way in which he maintained
Title:  discipline.
Title:  
Title:  At length Felton, who had not yet looked at Milady, turned toward
Title:  her.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said he, "she is asleep; that's well.  When she wakes
Title:  she can sup."  And he made some steps toward the door.
Title:  
Title:  "But, my lieutenant," said a soldier, less stoical than his
Title:  chief, and who had approached Milady, "this woman is not asleep."
Title:  
Title:  "What, not asleep!" said Felton; "what is she doing, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "She has fainted.  Her face is very pale, and I have listened in
Title:  vain; I do not hear her breathe."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right," said Felton, after having looked at Milady from
Title:  the spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her. "Go
Title:  and tell Lord de Winter that his prisoner has fainted--for this
Title:  event not having been foreseen, I don't know what to do."
Title:  
Title:  The soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer.  Felton
Title:  sat down upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, and
Title:  waited without speaking a word, without making a gesture.  Milady
Title:  possessed that great art, so much studied by women, of looking
Title:  through her long eyelashes without appearing to open the lids.
Title:  She perceived Felton, who sat with his back toward her.  She
Title:  continued to look at him for nearly ten minutes, and in these ten
Title:  minutes the immovable guardian never turned round once.
Title:  
Title:  She then thought that Lord de Winter would come, and by his
Title:  presence give fresh strength to her jailer.  Her first trial was
Title:  lost; she acted like a woman who reckons up her resources.  As a
Title:  result she raised her head, opened her eyes, and sighed deeply.
Title:  
Title:  At this sigh Felton turned round.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you are awake, madame," he said; "then I have nothing more
Title:  to do here.  If you want anything you can ring."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God! how I have suffered!" said Milady, in that
Title:  harmonious voice which, like that of the ancient enchantresses,
Title:  charmed all whom she wished to destroy.
Title:  
Title:  And she assumed, upon sitting up in the armchair, a still more
Title:  graceful and abandoned position than when she reclined.
Title:  
Title:  Felton arose.
Title:  
Title:  "You will be served, thus, madame, three times a day," said he.
Title:  "In the morning at nine o'clock, in the day at one o'clock, and
Title:  in the evening at eight.  If that does not suit you, you can
Title:  point out what other hours you prefer, and in this respect your
Title:  wishes will be complied with."
Title:  
Title:  "But am I to remain always alone in this vast and dismal
Title:  chamber?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "A woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for, who will be
Title:  tomorrow at the castle, and will return as often as you desire
Title:  her presence."
Title:  
Title:  "I thank you, sir," replied the prisoner, humbly.
Title:  
Title:  Felton made a slight bow, and directed his steps toward the door.
Title:  At the moment he was about to go out, Lord de Winter appeared in
Title:  the corridor, followed by the soldier who had been sent to inform
Title:  him of the swoon of Milady.  He held a vial of salts in his hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what is it--what is going on here?" said he, in a jeering
Title:  voice, on seeing the prisoner sitting up and Felton about to go
Title:  out.  "Is this corpse come to life already?  Felton, my lad, did
Title:  you not perceive that you were taken for a novice, and that the
Title:  first act was being performed of a comedy of which we shall
Title:  doubtless have the pleasure of following out all the
Title:  developments?"
Title:  
Title:  "I thought so, my lord," said Felton; "but as the prisoner is a
Title:  woman, after all, I wish to pay her the attention that every man
Title:  of gentle birth owes to a woman, if not on her account, at least
Title:  on my own."
Title:  
Title:  Milady shuddered through her whole system.  These words of
Title:  Felton's passed like ice through her veins.
Title:  
Title:  "So," replied de Winter, laughing, "that beautiful hair so
Title:  skillfully disheveled, that white skin, and that languishing
Title:  look, have not yet seduced you, you heart of stone?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, my Lord," replied the impassive young man; "your Lordship
Title:  may be assured that it requires more than the tricks and coquetry
Title:  of a woman to corrupt me."
Title:  
Title:  "In that case, my brave lieutenant, let us leave Milady to find
Title:  out something else, and go to supper; but be easy!  She has a
Title:  fruitful imagination, and the second act of the comedy will not
Title:  delay its steps after the first."
Title:  
Title:  And at these words Lord de Winter passed his arm through that of
Title:  Felton, and led him out, laughing.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I will be a match for you!" murmured Milady, between her
Title:  teeth; "be assured of that, you poor spoiled monk, you poor
Title:  converted soldier, who has cut his uniform out of a monk's
Title:  frock!"
Title:  
Title:  "By the way," resumed de Winter, stopping at the threshold of the
Title:  door, "you must not, Milady, let this check take away your
Title:  appetite.  Taste that fowl and those fish.  On my honor, they are
Title:  not poisoned.  I have a very good cook, and he is not to be my
Title:  heir; I have full and perfect confidence in him.  Do as I do.
Title:  Adieu, dear sister, till your next swoon!"
Title:  
Title:  This was all that Milady could endure.  Her hands clutched her
Title:  armchair; she ground her teeth inwardly; her eyes followed the
Title:  motion of the door as it closed behind Lord de Winter and Felton,
Title:  and the moment she was alone a fresh fit of despair seized her.
Title:  She cast her eyes upon the table, saw the glittering of a knife,
Title:  rushed toward it and clutched it; but her disappointment was
Title:  cruel.  The blade was round, and of flexible silver.
Title:  
Title:  A burst of laughter resounded from the other side of the ill-
Title:  closed door, and the door reopened.
Title:  
Title:  "Ha, ha!" cried Lord de Winter; "ha, ha!  Don't you see, my brave
Title:  Felton; don't you see what I told you?  That knife was for you,
Title:  my lad; she would have killed you.  Observe, this is one of her
Title:  peculiarities, to get rid thus, after one fashion or another, of
Title:  all the people who bother her.  If I had listened to you, the
Title:  knife would have been pointed and of steel.  Then no more of
Title:  Felton; she would have cut your throat, and after that everybody
Title:  else's.  See, John, see how well she knows how to handle a
Title:  knife."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, Milady still held the harmless weapon in her clenched
Title:  hand; but these last words, this supreme insult, relaxed her
Title:  hands, her strength, and even her will.  The knife fell to the
Title:  ground.
Title:  
Title:  "You were right, my Lord," said Felton, with a tone of profound
Title:  disgust which sounded to the very bottom of the heart of Milady,
Title:  "you were right, my Lord, and I was wrong."
Title:  
Title:  And both again left the room.
Title:  
Title:  But this time Milady lent a more attentive ear than the first,
Title:  and she heard their steps die away in the distance of the
Title:  corridor.
Title:  
Title:  "I am lost," murmured she; "I am lost!  I am in the power of men
Title:  upon whom I can have no more influence than upon statues of
Title:  bronze or granite; they know me by heart, and are steeled against
Title:  all my weapons.  It is, however, impossible that this should end
Title:  as they have decreed!"
Title:  
Title:  In fact, as this last reflection indicated--this instinctive
Title:  return to hope--sentiments of weakness or fear did not dwell long
Title:  in her ardent spirit.  Milady sat down to table, ate from several
Title:  dishes, drank a little Spanish wine, and felt all her resolution
Title:  return.
Title:  
Title:  Before she went to bed she had pondered, analyzed, turned on all
Title:  sides, examined on all points, the words, the steps, the
Title:  gestures, the signs, and even the silence of her interlocutors;
Title:  and of this profound, skillful, and anxious study the result was
Title:  that Felton, everything considered, appeared the more vulnerable
Title:  of her two persecutors.
Title:  
Title:  One expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner:
Title:  "If I had listened to you," Lord de Winter had said to Felton.
Title:  
Title:  Felton, then, had spoken in her favor, since Lord de Winter had
Title:  not been willing to listen to him.
Title:  
Title:  "Weak or strong," repeated Milady, "that man has, then, a spark
Title:  of pity in his soul; of that spark I will make a flame that shall
Title:  devour him.  As to the other, he knows me, he fears me, and knows
Title:  what he has to expect of me if ever I escape from his hands.  It
Title:  is useless, then, to attempt anything with him.  But Felton--
Title:  that's another thing.  He is a young, ingenuous, pure man who
Title:  seems virtuous; him there are means of destroying."
Title:  
Title:  And Milady went to bed and fell asleep with a smile upon her
Title:  lips.  Anyone who had seen her sleeping might have said she was a
Title:  young girl dreaming of the crown of flowers she was to wear on
Title:  her brow at the next festival.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  53  CAPTIVITY:  THE SECOND DAY
Title:  
Title:  Milady dreamed that she at length had d'Artagnan in her power,
Title:  that she was present at his execution; and it was the sight of
Title:  his odious blood, flowing beneath the ax of the headsman, which
Title:  spread that charming smile upon her lips.
Title:  
Title:  She slept as a prisoner sleeps, rocked by his first hope.
Title:  
Title:  In the morning, when they entered her chamber she was still in
Title:  bed.  Felton remained in the corridor.  He brought with him the
Title:  woman of whom he had spoken the evening before, and who had just
Title:  arrived; this woman entered, and approaching Milady's bed,
Title:  offered her services.
Title:  
Title:  Milady was habitually pale; her complexion might therefore
Title:  deceive a person who saw her for the first time.
Title:  
Title:  "I am in a fever," said she; "I have not slept a single instant
Title:  during all this long night.  I suffer horribly.  Are you likely
Title:  to be more humane to me than others were yesterday?  All I ask is
Title:  permission to remain abed."
Title:  
Title:  "Would you like to have a physician called?" said the woman.
Title:  
Title:  Felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word.
Title:  
Title:  Milady reflected that the more people she had around her the more
Title:  she would have to work upon, and Lord de Winter would redouble
Title:  his watch.  Besides, the physician might declare the ailment
Title:  feigned; and Milady, after having lost the first trick, was not
Title:  willing to lose the second.
Title:  
Title:  "Go and fetch a physician?" said she.  "What could be the good of
Title:  that?  These gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was a
Title:  comedy; it would be just the same today, no doubt--for since
Title:  yesterday evening they have had plenty of time to send for a
Title:  doctor."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said Felton, who became impatient, "say yourself, madame,
Title:  what treatment you wish followed."
Title:  
Title:  "Eh, how can I tell?  My God!  I know that I suffer, that's all.
Title:  Give me anything you like, it is of little consequence."
Title:  
Title:  "Go and fetch Lord de Winter," said Felton, tired of these
Title:  eternal complaints.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no, no!" cried Milady; "no, sir, do not call him, I conjure
Title:  you.  I am well, I want nothing; do not call him."
Title:  
Title:  She gave so much vehemence, such magnetic eloquence to this
Title:  exclamation, that Felton in spite of himself advanced some steps
Title:  into the room.
Title:  
Title:  "He has come!" thought Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Meanwhile, madame, if you really suffer," said Felton, "a
Title:  physician shall be sent for; and if you deceive us--well, it will
Title:  be the worse for you.  But at least we shall not have to reproach
Title:  ourselves with anything."
Title:  
Title:  Milady made no reply, but turning her beautiful head round upon
Title:  her pillow, she burst into tears, and uttered heartbreaking sobs.
Title:  
Title:  Felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness;
Title:  then, seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged, he went
Title:  out.  The woman followed him, and Lord de Winter did not appear.
Title:  
Title:  "I fancy I begin to see my way," murmured Milady, with a savage
Title:  joy, burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybody
Title:  who might be watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.
Title:  
Title:  Two hours passed away.
Title:  
Title:  "Now it is time that the malady should be over," said she; "let
Title:  me rise, and obtain some success this very day.  I have but ten
Title:  days, and this evening two of them will be gone."
Title:  
Title:  In the morning, when they entered Milady's chamber they had
Title:  brought her breakfast.  Now, she thought, they could not long
Title:  delay coming to clear the table, and that Felton would then
Title:  reappear.
Title:  
Title:  Milady was not deceived.  Felton reappeared, and without
Title:  observing whether Milady had or had not touched her repast, made
Title:  a sign that the table should be carried out of the room, it
Title:  having been brought in ready spread.
Title:  
Title:  Felton remained behind; he held a book in his hand.
Title:  
Title:  Milady, reclining in an armchair near the chimney, beautiful,
Title:  pale, and resigned, looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom.
Title:  
Title:  Felton approached her, and said, "Lord de Winter, who is a
Title:  Catholic, like yourself, madame, thinking that the deprivation of
Title:  the rites and ceremonies of your church might be painful to you,
Title:  has consented that you should read every day the ordinary of your
Title:  Mass; and here is a book which contains the ritual."
Title:  
Title:  At the manner in which Felton laid the book upon the little table
Title:  near which Milady was sitting, at the tone in which he pronounced
Title:  the two words, YOUR MASS, at the disdainful smile with which he
Title:  accompanied them, Milady raised her head, and looked more
Title:  attentively at the officer.
Title:  
Title:  By that plain arrangement of the hair, by that costume of extreme
Title:  simplicity, by the brow polished like marble and as hard and
Title:  impenetrable, she recognized one of those gloomy Puritans she had
Title:  so often met, not only in the court of King James, but in that of
Title:  the King of France, where, in spite of the remembrance of the St.
Title:  Bartholomew, they sometimes came to seek refuge.
Title:  
Title:  She then had one of those sudden inspirations which only people
Title:  of genius receive in great crises, in supreme moments which are
Title:  to decide their fortunes or their lives.
Title:  
Title:  Those two words, YOUR MASS, and a simple glance cast upon
Title:  Felton, revealed to her all the importance of the reply she was
Title:  about to make; but with that rapidity of intelligence which was
Title:  peculiar to her, this reply, ready arranged, presented itself to
Title:  her lips:
Title:  
Title:  "I?" said she, with an accent of disdain in unison with that
Title:  which she had remarked in the voice of the young officer, "I,
Title:  sir?  MY MASS?  Lord de Winter, the corrupted Catholic, knows
Title:  very well that I am not of his religion, and this is a snare he
Title:  wishes to lay for me!"
Title:  
Title:  "And of what religion are you, then, madame?" asked Felton, with
Title:  an astonishment which in spite of the empire he held over himself
Title:  he could not entirely conceal.
Title:  
Title:  "I will tell it," cried Milady, with a feigned exultation, "on
Title:  the day when I shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith."
Title:  
Title:  The look of Felton revealed to Milady the full extent of the
Title:  space she had opened for herself by this single word.
Title:  
Title:  The young officer, however, remained mute and motionless; his
Title:  look alone had spoken.
Title:  
Title:  "I am in the hands of my enemies," continued she, with that tone
Title:  of enthusiasm which she knew was familiar to the Puritans.
Title:  "Well, let my God save me, or let me perish for my God!  That is
Title:  the reply I beg you to make to Lord de Winter.  And as to this
Title:  book," added she, pointing to the manual with her finger but
Title:  without touching it, as if she must be contaminated by it, "you
Title:  may carry it back and make use of it yourself, for doubtless you
Title:  are doubly the accomplice of Lord de Winter--the accomplice in
Title:  his persecutions, the accomplice in his heresies."
Title:  
Title:  Felton made no reply, took the book with the same appearance of
Title:  repugnance which he had before manifested, and retired pensively.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter came toward five o'clock in the evening.  Milady
Title:  had had time, during the whole day, to trace her plan of conduct.
Title:  She received him like a woman who had already recovered all her
Title:  advantages.
Title:  
Title:  "It appears," said the baron, seating himself in the armchair
Title:  opposite that occupied by Milady, and stretching out his legs
Title:  carelessly upon the hearth, "it appears we have made a little
Title:  apostasy!"
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean, sir!"
Title:  
Title:  "I mean to say that since we last met you have changed your
Title:  religion.  You have not by chance married a Protestant for a
Title:  third husband, have you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Explain yourself, my Lord," replied the prisoner, with majesty;
Title:  "for though I hear your words, I declare I do not understand
Title:  them."
Title:  
Title:  "Then you have no religion at all; I like that best," replied
Title:  Lord de Winter, laughing.
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly that is most in accord with your own principles,"
Title:  replied Milady, frigidly.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I confess it is all the same to me."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you need not avow this religious indifference, my Lord; your
Title:  debaucheries and crimes would vouch for it."
Title:  
Title:  "What, you talk of debaucheries, Madame Messalina, Lady Macbeth!
Title:  Either I misunderstand you or you are very shameless!"
Title:  
Title:  "You only speak thus because you are overheard," coolly replied
Title:  Milady; "and you wish to interest your jailers and your hangmen
Title:  against me."
Title:  
Title:  "My jailers and my hangmen!  Heyday, madame! you are taking a
Title:  poetical tone, and the comedy of yesterday turns to a tragedy
Title:  this evening.  As to the rest, in eight days you will be where
Title:  you ought to be, and my task will be completed."
Title:  
Title:  "Infamous task! impious task!" cried Milady, with the exultation
Title:  of a victim who provokes his judge.
Title:  
Title:  "My word," said de Winter, rising, "I think the hussy is going
Title:  mad!  Come, come, calm yourself, Madame Puritan, or I'll remove
Title:  you to a dungeon.  It's my Spanish wine that has got into your
Title:  head, is it not?  But never mind; that sort of intoxication is
Title:  not dangerous, and will have no bad effects."
Title:  
Title:  And Lord de Winter retired swearing, which at that period was a
Title:  very knightly habit.
Title:  
Title:  Felton was indeed behind the door, and had not lost one word of
Title:  this scene.  Milady had guessed aright.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, go, go!" said she to her brother; "the effects ARE drawing
Title:  near, on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see them
Title:  until it is too late to shun them."
Title:  
Title:  Silence was re-established.  Two hours passed away.  Milady's
Title:  supper was brought in, and she was found deeply engaged in saying
Title:  her prayers aloud--prayers which she had learned of an old
Title:  servant of her second husband, a most austere Puritan.  She
Title:  appeared to be in ecstasy, and did not pay the least attention to
Title:  what was going on around her. Felton made a sign that she should
Title:  not be disturbed; and when all was arranged, he went out quietly
Title:  with the soldiers.
Title:  
Title:  Milady knew she might be watched, so she continued her prayers to
Title:  the end; and it appeared to her that the soldier who was on duty
Title:  at her door did not march with the same step, and seemed to
Title:  listen.  For the moment she wished nothing better.  She arose,
Title:  came to the table, ate but little, and drank only water.
Title:  
Title:  An hour after, her table was cleared; but Milady remarked that
Title:  this time Felton did not accompany the soldiers.  He feared,
Title:  then, to see her too often.
Title:  
Title:  She turned toward the wall to smile--for there was in this smile
Title:  such an expression of triumph that this smile alone would have
Title:  betrayed her.
Title:  
Title:  She allowed, therefore, half an hour to pass away; and as at that
Title:  moment all was silence in the old castle, as nothing was heard
Title:  but the eternal murmur of the waves--that immense breaking of the
Title:  ocean--with her pure, harmonious, and powerful voice, she began
Title:  the first couplet of the psalm then in great favor with the
Title:  Puritans:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Thou leavest thy servants, Lord,
Title:  To see if they be strong;
Title:  But soon thou dost afford
Title:  Thy hand to lead them on."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  These verses were not excellent--very far from it; but as it is
Title:  well known, the Puritans did not pique themselves upon their
Title:  poetry.
Title:  
Title:  While singing, Milady listened.  The soldier on guard at her door
Title:  stopped, as if he had been changed into stone.  Milady was then
Title:  able to judge of the effect she had produced.
Title:  
Title:  Then she continued her singing with inexpressible fervor and
Title:  feeling.  It appeared to her that the sounds spread to a distance
Title:  beneath the vaulted roofs, and carried with them a magic charm to
Title:  soften the hearts of her jailers.  It however likewise appeared
Title:  that the soldier on duty--a zealous Catholic, no doubt--shook off
Title:  the charm, for through the door he called:  "Hold your tongue,
Title:  madame!  Your song is as dismal as a 'De profundis'; and if
Title:  besides the pleasure of being in garrison here, we must hear such
Title:  things as these, no mortal can hold out."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!" then exclaimed another stern voice which Milady
Title:  recognized as that of Felton.  "What are you meddling with,
Title:  stupid?  Did anybody order you to prevent that woman from
Title:  singing?  No.  You were told to guard her--to fire at her if she
Title:  attempted to fly.  Guard her!  If she flies, kill her; but don't
Title:  exceed your orders."
Title:  
Title:  An expression of unspeakable joy lightened the countenance of
Title:  Milady; but this expression was fleeting as the reflection of
Title:  lightning.  Without appearing to have heard the dialogue, of
Title:  which she had not lost a word, she began again, giving to her
Title:  voice all the charm, all the power, all the seduction the demon
Title:  had bestowed upon it:
Title:  
Title:    "For all my tears, my cares,
Title:      My exile, and my chains,
Title:    I have my youth, my prayers,
Title:      And God, who counts my pains."
Title:  
Title:  Her voice, of immense power and sublime expression, gave to the
Title:  rude, unpolished poetry of these psalms a magic and an effect
Title:  which the most exalted Puritans rarely found in the songs of
Title:  their brethren, and which they were forced to ornament with all
Title:  the resources of their imagination.  Felton believed he heard the
Title:  singing of the angel who consoled the three Hebrews in the
Title:  furnace.
Title:  
Title:  Milady continued:
Title:  
Title:  "One day our doors will ope,
Title:  With God come our desire;
Title:  And if betrays that hope,
Title:  To death we can aspire."
Title:  
Title:  This verse, into which the terrible enchantress threw her whole
Title:  soul, completed the trouble which had seized the heart of the
Title:  young officer.  He opened the door quickly; and Milady saw him
Title:  appear, pale as usual, but with his eye inflamed and almost wild.
Title:  
Title:  "Why do you sing thus, and with such a voice?" said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Your pardon, sir," said Milady, with mildness.  "I forgot that
Title:  my songs are out of place in this castle.  I have perhaps
Title:  offended you in your creed; but it was without wishing to do so,
Title:  I swear.  Pardon me, then, a fault which is perhaps great, but
Title:  which certainly was involuntary."
Title:  
Title:  Milady was so beautiful at this moment, the religious ecstasy in
Title:  which she appeared to be plunged gave such an expression to her
Title:  countenance, that Felton was so dazzled that he fancied he beheld
Title:  the angel whom he had only just before heard.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," said he; "you disturb, you agitate the people who
Title:  live in the castle."
Title:  
Title:  The poor, senseless young man was not aware of the incoherence of
Title:  his words, while Milady was reading with her lynx's eyes the very
Title:  depths of his heart.
Title:  
Title:  "I will be silent, then," said Milady, casting down her eyes with
Title:  all the sweetness she could give to her voice, with all the
Title:  resignation she could impress upon her manner.
Title:  
Title:  "No, no, madame," said Felton, "only do not sing so loud,
Title:  particularly at night."
Title:  
Title:  And at these words Felton, feeling that he could not long
Title:  maintain his severity toward his prisoner, rushed out of the
Title:  room.
Title:  
Title:  "You have done right, Lieutenant," said the soldier.  "Such songs
Title:  disturb the mind; and yet we become accustomed to them, her voice
Title:  is so beautiful."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  54  CAPTIVITY:  THE THIRD DAY
Title:  
Title:  Felton had fallen; but there was still another step to be taken.
Title:  He must be retained, or rather he must be left quite alone; and
Title:  Milady but obscurely perceived the means which could lead to this
Title:  result.
Title:  
Title:  Still more must be done.  He must be made to speak, in order that
Title:  he might be spoken to--for Milady very well knew that her
Title:  greatest seduction was in her voice, which so skillfully ran over
Title:  the whole gamut of tones from human speech to language celestial.
Title:  
Title:  Yet in spite of all this seduction Milady might fail--for Felton
Title:  was forewarned, and that against the least chance.  From that
Title:  moment she watched all his actions, all his words, from the
Title:  simplest glance of his eyes to his gestures--even to a breath
Title:  that could be interpreted as a sigh.  In short, she studied
Title:  everything, as a skillful comedian does to whom a new part has
Title:  been assigned in a line to which he is not accustomed.
Title:  
Title:  Face to face with Lord de Winter her plan of conduct was more
Title:  easy.  She had laid that down the preceding evening.  To remain
Title:  silent and dignified in his presence; from time to time to
Title:  irritate him by affected disdain, by a contemptuous word; to
Title:  provoke him to threats and violence which would produce a
Title:  contrast with her own resignation--such was her plan.  Felton
Title:  would see all; perhaps he would say nothing, but he would see.
Title:  
Title:  In the morning, Felton came as usual; but Milady allowed him to
Title:  preside over all the preparations for breakfast without
Title:  addressing a word to him.  At the moment when he was about to
Title:  retire, she was cheered with a ray of hope, for she thought he
Title:  was about to speak; but his lips moved without any sound leaving
Title:  his mouth, and making a powerful effort to control himself, he
Title:  sent back to his heart the words that were about to escape from
Title:  his lips, and went out.  Toward midday, Lord de Winter entered.
Title:  
Title:  It was a tolerably fine winter's day, and a ray of that pale
Title:  English sun which lights but does not warm came through the bars
Title:  of her prison.
Title:  
Title:  Milady was looking out at the window, and pretended not to hear
Title:  the door as it opened.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!" said Lord de Winter, "after having played comedy, after
Title:  having played tragedy, we are now playing melancholy?"
Title:  
Title:  The prisoner made no reply.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," continued Lord de Winter, "I understand.  You would
Title:  like very well to be at liberty on that beach!  You would like
Title:  very well to be in a good ship dancing upon the waves of that
Title:  emerald-green sea; you would like very well, either on land or on
Title:  the ocean, to lay for me one of those nice little ambuscades you
Title:  are so skillful in planning.  Patience, patience!  In four days'
Title:  time the shore will be beneath your feet, the sea will be open to
Title:  you--more open than will perhaps be agreeable to you, for in four
Title:  days England will be relieved of you."
Title:  
Title:  Milady folded her hands, and raising her fine eyes toward heaven,
Title:  "Lord, Lord," said she, with an angelic meekness of gesture and
Title:  tone, "pardon this man, as I myself pardon him."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, pray, accursed woman!" cried the baron; "your prayer is so
Title:  much the more generous from your being, I swear to you, in the
Title:  power of a man who will never pardon you!" and he went out.
Title:  
Title:  At the moment he went out a piercing glance darted through the
Title:  opening of the nearly closed door, and she perceived Felton, who
Title:  drew quickly to one side to prevent being seen by her.
Title:  
Title:  Then she threw herself upon her knees, and began to pray.
Title:  
Title:  "My God, my God!" said she, "thou knowest in what holy cause I
Title:  suffer; give me, then, strength to suffer."
Title:  
Title:  The door opened gently; the beautiful supplicant pretended not to
Title:  hear the noise, and in a voice broken by tears, she continued:
Title:  
Title:  "God of vengeance!  God of goodness! wilt thou allow the
Title:  frightful projects of this man to be accomplished?"
Title:  
Title:  Then only she pretended to hear the sound of Felton's steps, and
Title:  rising quick as thought, she blushed, as if ashamed of being
Title:  surprised on her knees.
Title:  
Title:  "I do not like to disturb those who pray, madame," said Felton,
Title:  seriously; "do not disturb yourself on my account, I beseech
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  "How do you know I was praying, sir?" said Milady, in a voice
Title:  broken by sobs.  "You were deceived, sir; I was not praying."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you think, then, madame," replied Felton, in the same serious
Title:  voice, but with a milder tone, "do you think I assume the right
Title:  of preventing a creature from prostrating herself before her
Title:  Creator?  God forbid!  Besides, repentance becomes the guilty;
Title:  whatever crimes they may have committed, for me the guilty are
Title:  sacred at the feet of God!"
Title:  
Title:  "Guilty?  I?" said Milady, with a smile which might have disarmed
Title:  the angel of the last judgment.  "Guilty?  Oh, my God, thou
Title:  knowest whether I am guilty!  Say I am condemned, sir, if you
Title:  please; but you know that God, who loves martyrs, sometimes
Title:  permits the innocent to be condemned."
Title:  
Title:  "Were you condemned, were you innocent, were you a martyr,"
Title:  replied Felton, "the greater would be the necessity for prayer;
Title:  and I myself would aid you with my prayers."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you are a just man!" cried Milady, throwing herself at his
Title:  feet.  "I can hold out no longer, for I fear I shall be wanting
Title:  in strength at the moment when I shall be forced to undergo the
Title:  struggle, and confess my faith.  Listen, then, to the
Title:  supplication of a despairing woman.  You are abused, sir; but
Title:  that is not the question.  I only ask you one favor; and if you
Title:  grant it me, I will bless you in this world and in the next."
Title:  
Title:  "Speak to the master, madame," said Felton; "happily I am neither
Title:  charged with the power of pardoning nor punishing.  It is upon
Title:  one higher placed than I am that God has laid this
Title:  responsibility."
Title:  
Title:  "To you--no, to you alone!  Listen to me, rather than add to my
Title:  destruction, rather than add to my ignominy!"
Title:  
Title:  "If you have merited this shame, madame, if you have incurred
Title:  this ignominy, you must submit to it as an offering to God."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you say?  Oh, you do not understand me!  When I speak of
Title:  ignominy, you think I speak of some chastisement, of imprisonment
Title:  or death.  Would to heaven!  Of what consequence to me is
Title:  imprisonment or death?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is I who no longer understand you, madame," said Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Or, rather, who pretend not to understand me, sir!" replied the
Title:  prisoner, with a smile of incredulity.
Title:  
Title:  "No, madame, on the honor of a soldier, on the faith of a
Title:  Christian."
Title:  
Title:  "What, you are ignorant of Lord de Winter's designs upon me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am."
Title:  
Title:  "Impossible; you are his confidant!"
Title:  
Title:  "I never lie, madame."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, he conceals them too little for you not to divine them."
Title:  
Title:  "I seek to divine nothing, madame; I wait till I am confided in,
Title:  and apart from that which Lord de Winter has said to me before
Title:  you, he has confided nothing to me."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, then," cried Milady, with an incredible tone of
Title:  truthfulness, "you are not his accomplice; you do not know that
Title:  he destines me to a disgrace which all the punishments of the
Title:  world cannot equal in horror?"
Title:  
Title:  "You are deceived, madame," said Felton, blushing; "Lord de
Title:  Winter is not capable of such a crime."
Title:  
Title:  "Good," said Milady to herself; "without thinking what it is, he
Title:  calls it a crime!"  Then aloud, "The friend of THAT WRETCH is
Title:  capable of everything."
Title:  
Title:  "Whom do you call 'that wretch'?" asked Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Are there, then, in England two men to whom such an epithet can
Title:  be applied?"
Title:  
Title:  "You mean George Villiers?" asked Felton, whose looks became
Title:  excited.
Title:  
Title:  "Whom Pagans and unbelieving Gentiles call Duke of Buckingham,"
Title:  replied Milady.  "I could not have thought that there was an
Title:  Englishman in all England who would have required so long an
Title:  explanation to make him understand of whom I was speaking."
Title:  
Title:  "The hand of the Lord is stretched over him," said Felton; "he
Title:  will not escape the chastisement he deserves."
Title:  
Title:  Felton only expressed, with regard to the duke, the feeling of
Title:  execration which all the English had declared toward him whom the
Title:  Catholics themselves called the extortioner, the pillager, the
Title:  debauchee, and whom the Puritans styled simply Satan.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God!" cried Milady; "when I supplicate thee to
Title:  pour upon this man the chastisement which is his due, thou
Title:  knowest it is not my own vengeance I pursue, but the deliverance
Title:  of a whole nation that I implore!"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know him, then?" asked Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "At length he interrogates me!" said Milady to herself, at the
Title:  height of joy at having obtained so quickly such a great result.
Title:  "Oh, know him?  Yes, yes! to my misfortune, to my eternal
Title:  misfortune!" and Milady twisted her arms as if in a paroxysm of
Title:  grief.
Title:  
Title:  Felton no doubt felt within himself that his strength was
Title:  abandoning him, and he made several steps toward the door; but
Title:  the prisoner, whose eye never left him, sprang in pursuit of him
Title:  and stopped him.
Title:  
Title:  "Sir," cried she, "be kind, be clement, listen to my prayer!
Title:  That knife, which the fatal prudence of the baron deprived me of,
Title:  because he knows the use I would make of it!  Oh, hear me to the
Title:  end! that knife, give it to me for a minute only, for mercy's,
Title:  for pity's sake!  I will embrace your knees!  You shall shut the
Title:  door that you may be certain I contemplate no injury to you!  My
Title:  God! to you--the only just, good, and compassionate being I have
Title:  met with!  To you--my preserver, perhaps!  One minute that knife,
Title:  one minute, a single minute, and I will restore it to you through
Title:  the grating of the door.  Only one minute, Mr. Felton, and you
Title:  will have saved my honor!"
Title:  
Title:  "To kill yourself?" cried Felton, with terror, forgetting to
Title:  withdraw his hands from the hands of the prisoner, "to kill
Title:  yourself?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have told, sir," murmured Milady, lowering her voice, and
Title:  allowing herself to sink overpowered to the ground; "I have told
Title:  my secret!  He knows all!  My God, I am lost!"
Title:  
Title:  Felton remained standing, motionless and undecided.
Title:  
Title:  "He still doubts," thought Milady; "I have not been earnest
Title:  enough."
Title:  
Title:  Someone was heard in the corridor; Milady recognized the step of
Title:  Lord de Winter.
Title:  
Title:  Felton recognized it also, and made a step toward the door.
Title:  
Title:  Milady sprang toward him.  "Oh, not a word," said she in a
Title:  concentrated voice, "not a word of all that I have said to you to
Title:  this man, or I am lost, and it would be you--you--"
Title:  
Title:  Then as the steps drew near, she became silent for fear of being
Title:  heard, applying, with a gesture of infinite terror, her beautiful
Title:  hand to Felton's mouth.
Title:  
Title:  Felton gently repulsed Milady, and she sank into a chair.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter passed before the door without stopping, and they
Title:  heard the noise of his footsteps soon die away.
Title:  
Title:  Felton, as pale as death, remained some instants with his ear
Title:  bent and listening; then, when the sound was quite extinct, he
Title:  breathed like a man awaking from a dream, and rushed out of the
Title:  apartment.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah!" said Milady, listening in her turn to the noise of Felton's
Title:  steps, which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of Lord de
Title:  Winter; "at length you are mine!"
Title:  
Title:  Then her brow darkened.  "If he tells the baron," said she, "I am
Title:  lost--for the baron, who knows very well that I shall not kill
Title:  myself, will place me before him with a knife in my hand, and he
Title:  will discover that all this despair is but acted."
Title:  
Title:  She placed herself before the glass, and regarded herself
Title:  attentively; never had she appeared more beautiful.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes," said she, smiling, "but we won't tell him!"
Title:  
Title:  In the evening Lord de Winter accompanied the supper.
Title:  
Title:  "Sir," said Milady, "is your presence an indispensable accessory
Title:  of my captivity?  Could you not spare me the increase of torture
Title:  which your visits cause me?"
Title:  
Title:  "How, dear sister!" said Lord de Winter.  "Did not you
Title:  sentimentally inform me with that pretty mouth of yours, so cruel
Title:  to me today, that you came to England solely for the pleasure of
Title:  seeing me at your ease, an enjoyment of which you told me you so
Title:  sensibly felt the deprivation that you had risked everything for
Title:  it--seasickness, tempest, captivity?  Well, here I am; be
Title:  satisfied.  Besides, this time, my visit has a motive."
Title:  
Title:  Milady trembled; she thought Felton had told all.  Perhaps never
Title:  in her life had this woman, who had experienced so many opposite
Title:  and powerful emotions, felt her heart beat so violently.
Title:  
Title:  She was seated.  Lord de Winter took a chair, drew it toward her,
Title:  and sat down close beside her.  Then taking a paper out of his
Title:  pocket, he unfolded it slowly.
Title:  
Title:  "Here," said he, "I want to show you the kind of passport which I
Title:  have drawn up, and which will serve you henceforward as the rule
Title:  of order in the life I consent to leave you."
Title:  
Title:  Then turning his eyes from Milady to the paper, he read: "'Order
Title:  to conduct--'  The name is blank," interrupted Lord de Winter.
Title:  "If you have any preference you can point it out to me; and if it
Title:  be not within a thousand leagues of London, attention will be
Title:  paid to your wishes.  I will begin again, then:
Title:  
Title:  "'Order to conduct to--the person named Charlotte Backson,
Title:  branded by the justice of the kingdom of France, but liberated
Title:  after chastisement.  She is to dwell in this place without ever
Title:  going more than three leagues from it.  In case of any attempt to
Title:  escape, the penalty of death is to be applied.  She will receive
Title:  five shillings per day for lodging and food'".
Title:  
Title:  "That order does not concern me," replied Milady, coldly, "since
Title:  it bears another name than mine."
Title:  
Title:  "A name?  Have you a name, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "I bear that of your brother."
Title:  
Title:  "Ay, but you are mistaken.  My brother is only your second
Title:  husband; and your first is still living.  Tell me his name, and I
Title:  will put it in the place of the name of Charlotte Backson.  No?
Title:  You will not?  You are silent?  Well, then you must be registered
Title:  as Charlotte Backson."
Title:  
Title:  Milady remained silent; only this time it was no longer from
Title:  affectation, but from terror.  She believed the order ready for
Title:  execution.  She thought that Lord de Winter had hastened her
Title:  departure; she thought she was condemned to set off that very
Title:  evening.  Everything in her mind was lost for an instant; when
Title:  all at once she perceived that no signature was attached to the
Title:  order.  The joy she felt at this discovery was so great she could
Title:  not conceal it.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," said Lord de Winter, who perceived what was passing
Title:  in her mind; "yes, you look for the signature, and you say to
Title:  yourself:  'All is not lost, for that order is not signed.  It is
Title:  only shown to me to terrify me, that's all.'  You are mistaken.
Title:  Tomorrow this order will be sent to the Duke of Buckingham.  The
Title:  day after tomorrow it will return signed by his hand and marked
Title:  with his seal; and four-and-twenty hours afterward I will answer
Title:  for its being carried into execution.  Adieu, madame.  That is
Title:  all I had to say to you."
Title:  
Title:  "And I reply to you, sir, that this abuse of power, this exile
Title:  under a fictitious name, are infamous!"
Title:  
Title:  "Would you like better to be hanged in your true name, Milady?
Title:  You know that the English laws are inexorable on the abuse of
Title:  marriage.  Speak freely.  Although my name, or rather that of my
Title:  brother, would be mixed up with the affair, I will risk the
Title:  scandal of a public trial to make myself certain of getting rid
Title:  of you."
Title:  
Title:  Milady made no reply, but became as pale as a corpse.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I see you prefer peregrination.  That's well madame; and
Title:  there is an old proverb that says, 'Traveling trains youth.'  My
Title:  faith! you are not wrong after all, and life is sweet.  That's
Title:  the reason why I take such care you shall not deprive me of mine.
Title:  There only remains, then, the question of the five shillings to
Title:  be settled.  You think me rather parsimonious, don't you?  That's
Title:  because I don't care to leave you the means of corrupting your
Title:  jailers.  Besides, you will always have your charms left to
Title:  seduce them with.  Employ them, if your check with regard to
Title:  Felton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind."
Title:  
Title:  "Felton has not told him," said Milady to herself.  "Nothing is
Title:  lost, then."
Title:  
Title:  "And now, madame, till I see you again!  Tomorrow I will come and
Title:  announce to you the departure of my messenger."
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter rose, saluted her ironically, and went out.
Title:  
Title:  Milady breathed again.  She had still four days before her.  Four
Title:  days would quite suffice to complete the seduction of Felton.
Title:  
Title:  A terrible idea, however, rushed into her mind.  She thought that
Title:  Lord de Winter would perhaps send Felton himself to get the order
Title:  signed by the Duke of Buckingham.  In that case Felton would
Title:  escape her--for in order to secure success, the magic of a
Title:  continuous seduction was necessary.  Nevertheless, as we have
Title:  said, one circumstance reassured her.  Felton had not spoken.
Title:  
Title:  As she would not appear to be agitated by the threats of Lord de
Title:  Winter, she placed herself at the table and ate.
Title:  
Title:  Then, as she had done the evening before, she fell on her knees
Title:  and repeated her prayers aloud.  As on the evening before, the
Title:  soldier stopped his march to listen to her.
Title:  
Title:  Soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel,
Title:  which came from the end of the corridor and stopped before her
Title:  door.
Title:  
Title:  "It is he," said she.  And she began the same religious chant
Title:  which had so strongly excited Felton the evening before.
Title:  
Title:  But although her voice--sweet, full, and sonorous--vibrated as
Title:  harmoniously and as affectingly as ever, the door remained shut.
Title:  It appeared however to Milady that in one of the furtive glances
Title:  she darted from time to time at the grating of the door she
Title:  thought she saw the ardent eyes of the young man through the
Title:  narrow opening.  But whether this was reality or vision, he had
Title:  this time sufficient self-command not to enter.
Title:  
Title:  However, a few instants after she had finished her religious
Title:  song, Milady thought she heard a profound sigh.  Then the same
Title:  steps she had heard approach slowly withdrew, as if with regret.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  55  CAPTIVITY:  THE FOURTH DAY
Title:  
Title:  The next day, when Felton entered Milady's apartment he found her
Title:  standing, mounted upon a chair, holding in her hands a cord made
Title:  by means of torn cambric handkerchiefs, twisted into a kind of
Title:  rope one with another, and tied at the ends.  At the noise Felton
Title:  made in entering, Milady leaped lightly to the ground, and tried
Title:  to conceal behind her the improvised cord she held in her hand.
Title:  
Title:  The young man was more pale than usual, and his eyes, reddened by
Title:  want of sleep, denoted that he had passed a feverish night.
Title:  Nevertheless, his brow was armed with a severity more austere
Title:  than ever.
Title:  
Title:  He advanced slowly toward Milady, who had seated herself, and
Title:  taking an end of the murderous rope which by neglect, or perhaps
Title:  by design, she allowed to be seen, "What is this, madame?" he
Title:  asked coldly.
Title:  
Title:  "That?  Nothing," said Milady, smiling with that painful
Title:  expression which she knew so well how to give to her smile.
Title:  "Ennui is the mortal enemy of prisoners; I had ennui, and I
Title:  amused myself with twisting that rope."
Title:  
Title:  Felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of the
Title:  apartment before which he had found Milady standing in the
Title:  armchair in which she was now seated, and over her head he
Title:  perceived a gilt-headed screw, fixed in the wall for the purpose
Title:  of hanging up clothes or weapons.
Title:  
Title:  He started, and the prisoner saw that start--for though her eyes
Title:  were cast down, nothing escaped her.
Title:  
Title:  "What were you doing on that armchair?" asked he.
Title:  
Title:  "Of what consequence?" replied Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "But," replied Felton, "I wish to know."
Title:  
Title:  "Do not question me," said the prisoner; "you know that we who
Title:  are true Christians are forbidden to lie."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then," said Felton, "I will tell you what you were doing,
Title:  or rather what you meant to do; you were going to complete the
Title:  fatal project you cherish in your mind.  Remember, madame, if our
Title:  God forbids falsehood, he much more severely condemns suicide."
Title:  
Title:  "When God sees one of his creatures persecuted unjustly, placed
Title:  between suicide and dishonor, believe me, sir," replied Milady,
Title:  in a tone of deep conviction, "God pardons suicide, for then
Title:  suicide becomes martyrdom."
Title:  
Title:  "You say either too much or too little; speak, madame.  In the
Title:  name of heaven, explain yourself."
Title:  
Title:  "That I may relate my misfortunes for you to treat them as
Title:  fables; that I may tell you my projects for you to go and betray
Title:  them to my persecutor?  No, sir.  Besides, of what importance to
Title:  you is the life or death of a condemned wretch?  You are only
Title:  responsible for my body, is it not so?  And provided you produce
Title:  a carcass that may be recognized as mine, they will require no
Title:  more of you; nay, perhaps you will even have a double reward."
Title:  
Title:  "I, madame, I?" cried Felton.  "You suppose that I would ever
Title:  accept the price of your life?  Oh, you cannot believe what you
Title:  say!"
Title:  
Title:  "Let me act as I please, Felton, let me act as I please," said
Title:  Milady, elated.  "Every soldier must be ambitious, must he not?
Title:  You are a lieutenant?  Well, you will follow me to the grave with
Title:  the rank of captain."
Title:  
Title:  "What have I, then, done to you," said Felton, much agitated,
Title:  "that you should load me with such a responsibility before God
Title:  and before men?  In a few days you will be away from this place;
Title:  your life, madame, will then no longer be under my care, and,"
Title:  added he, with a sigh, "then you can do what you will with it."
Title:  
Title:  "So," cried Milady, as if she could not resist giving utterance
Title:  to a holy indignation, "you, a pious man, you who are called a
Title:  just man, you ask but one thing--and that is that you may not be
Title:  inculpated, annoyed, by my death!"
Title:  
Title:  "It is my duty to watch over your life, madame, and I will
Title:  watch."
Title:  
Title:  "But do you understand the mission you are fulfilling?  Cruel
Title:  enough, if I am guilty; but what name can you give it, what name
Title:  will the Lord give it, if I am innocent?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am a soldier, madame, and fulfill the orders I have received."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you believe, then, that at the day of the Last Judgment God
Title:  will separate blind executioners from iniquitous judges?  You are
Title:  not willing that I should kill my body, and you make yourself the
Title:  agent of him who would kill my soul."
Title:  
Title:  "But I repeat it again to you," replied Felton, in great emotion,
Title:  "no danger threatens you; I will answer for Lord de Winter as for
Title:  myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Dunce," cried Milady, "dunce! who dares to answer for another
Title:  man, when the wisest, when those most after God's own heart,
Title:  hesitate to answer for themselves, and who ranges himself on the
Title:  side of the strongest and the most fortunate, to crush the
Title:  weakest and the most unfortunate."
Title:  
Title:  "Impossible, madame, impossible," murmured Felton, who felt to
Title:  the bottom of his heart the justness of this argument.  "A
Title:  prisoner, you will not recover your liberty through me; living,
Title:  you will not lose your life through me."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," cried Milady, "but I shall lose that which is much dearer
Title:  to me than life, I shall lose my honor, Felton; and it is you,
Title:  you whom I make responsible, before God and before men, for my
Title:  shame and my infamy."
Title:  
Title:  This time Felton, immovable as he was, or appeared to be, could
Title:  not resist the secret influence which had already taken
Title:  possession of him.  To see this woman, so beautiful, fair as the
Title:  brightest vision, to see her by turns overcome with grief and
Title:  threatening; to resist at once the ascendancy of grief and
Title:  beauty--it was too much for a visionary; it was too much for a
Title:  brain weakened by the ardent dreams of an ecstatic faith; it was
Title:  too much for a heart furrowed by the love of heaven that burns,
Title:  by the hatred of men that devours.
Title:  
Title:  Milady saw the trouble.  She felt by intuition the flame of the
Title:  opposing passions which burned with the blood in the veins of the
Title:  young fanatic.  As a skillful general, seeing the enemy ready to
Title:  surrender, marches toward him with a cry of victory, she rose,
Title:  beautiful as an antique priestess, inspired like a Christian
Title:  virgin, her arms extended, her throat uncovered, her hair
Title:  disheveled, holding with one hand her robe modestly drawn over
Title:  her breast, her look illumined by that fire which had already
Title:  created such disorder in the veins of the young Puritan, and went
Title:  toward him, crying out with a vehement air, and in her melodious
Title:  voice, to which on this occasion she communicated a terrible
Title:  energy:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Let this victim to Baal be sent,
Title:  To the lions the martyr be thrown!
Title:  Thy God shall teach thee to repent!
Title:  From th' abyss he'll give ear to my moan."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Felton stood before this strange apparition like one petrified.
Title:  
Title:  "Who art thou?  Who art thou?" cried he, clasping his hands.
Title:  "Art thou a messenger from God; art thou a minister from hell;
Title:  art thou an angel or a demon; callest thou thyself Eloa or
Title:  Astarte?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you not know me, Felton?  I am neither an angel nor a demon;
Title:  I am a daughter of earth, I am a sister of thy faith, that is
Title:  all."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes!" said Felton, "I doubted, but now I believe."
Title:  
Title:  "You believe, and still you are an accomplice of that child of
Title:  Belial who is called Lord de Winter!  You believe, and yet you
Title:  leave me in the hands of mine enemies, of the enemy of England,
Title:  of the enemy of God!  You believe, and yet you deliver me up to
Title:  him who fills and defiles the world with his heresies and
Title:  debaucheries--to that infamous Sardanapalus whom the blind call
Title:  the Duke of Buckingham, and whom believers name Antichrist!"
Title:  
Title:  "I deliver you up to Buckingham?  I? what mean you by that?"
Title:  
Title:  "They have eyes," cried Milady, "but they see not; ears have
Title:  they, but they hear not."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes!" said Felton, passing his hands over his brow, covered
Title:  with sweat, as if to remove his last doubt.  "Yes, I recognize
Title:  the voice which speaks to me in my dreams; yes, I recognize the
Title:  features of the angel who appears to me every night, crying to my
Title:  soul, which cannot sleep: 'Strike, save England, save thyself--
Title:  for thou wilt die without having appeased God!' Speak, speak!"
Title:  cried Felton, "I can understand you now."
Title:  
Title:  A flash of terrible joy, but rapid as thought, gleamed from the
Title:  eyes of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  However fugitive this homicide flash, Felton saw it, and started
Title:  as if its light had revealed the abysses of this woman's heart.
Title:  He recalled, all at once, the warnings of Lord de Winter, the
Title:  seductions of Milady, her first attempts after her arrival.  He
Title:  drew back a step, and hung down his head, without, however,
Title:  ceasing to look at her, as if, fascinated by this strange
Title:  creature, he could not detach his eyes from her eyes.
Title:  
Title:  Milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of this
Title:  hesitation.  Under her apparent emotions her icy coolness never
Title:  abandoned her.  Before Felton replied, and before she should be
Title:  forced to resume this conversation, so difficult to be sustained
Title:  in the same exalted tone, she let her hands fall; and as if the
Title:  weakness of the woman overpowered the enthusiasm of the inspired
Title:  fanatic, she said:  "But no, it is not for me to be the Judith to
Title:  deliver Bethulia from this Holofernes.  The sword of the eternal
Title:  is too heavy for my arm.  Allow me, then, to avoid dishonor by
Title:  death; let me take refuge in martyrdom.  I do not ask you for
Title:  liberty, as a guilty one would, nor for vengeance, as would a
Title:  pagan.  Let me die; that is all.  I supplicate you, I implore you
Title:  on my knees--let me die, and my last sigh shall be a blessing for
Title:  my preserver."
Title:  
Title:  Hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, so
Title:  timid and downcast, Felton reproached himself.  By degrees the
Title:  enchantress had clothed herself with that magic adornment which
Title:  she assumed and threw aside at will; that is to say, beauty,
Title:  meekness, and tears--and above all, the irresistible attraction
Title:  of mystical voluptuousness, the most devouring of all
Title:  voluptuousness.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas!" said Felton, "I can do but one thing, which is to pity
Title:  you if you prove to me you are a victim!  But Lord de Winter
Title:  makes cruel accusations against you.  You are a Christian; you
Title:  are my sister in religion.  I feel myself drawn toward you--I,
Title:  who have never loved anyone but my benefactor--I who have met
Title:  with nothing but traitors and impious men.  But you, madame, so
Title:  beautiful in reality, you, so pure in appearance, must have
Title:  committed great iniquities for Lord de Winter to pursue you
Title:  thus."
Title:  
Title:  "They have eyes," repeated Milady, with an accent of
Title:  indescribable grief, "but they see not; ears have they, but they
Title:  hear not."
Title:  
Title:  "But," cried the young officer, "speak, then, speak!"
Title:  
Title:  "Confide my shame to you," cried Milady, with the blush of
Title:  modesty upon her countenance, "for often the crime of one becomes
Title:  the shame of another--confide my shame to you, a man, and I a
Title:  woman?  Oh," continued she, placing her hand modestly over her
Title:  beautiful eyes, "never! never!--I could not!"
Title:  
Title:  "To me, to a brother?" said Felton.
Title:  
Title:  Milady looked at him for some time with an expression which the
Title:  young man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing but
Title:  observation, or rather the wish to fascinate.
Title:  
Title:  Felton, in his turn a suppliant, clasped his hands.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then," said Milady, "I confide in my brother; I will dare
Title:  to--"
Title:  
Title:  At this moment the steps of Lord de Winter were heard; but this
Title:  time the terrible brother-in-law of Milady did not content
Title:  himself, as on the preceding day, with passing before the door
Title:  and going away again.  He paused, exchanged two words with the
Title:  sentinel; then the door opened, and he appeared.
Title:  
Title:  During the exchange of these two words Felton drew back quickly,
Title:  and when Lord de Winter entered, he was several paces from the
Title:  prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  The baron entered slowly, sending a scrutinizing glance from
Title:  Milady to the young officer.
Title:  
Title:  "You have been here a very long time, John," said he.  "Has this
Title:  woman been relating her crimes to you?  In that case I can
Title:  comprehend the length of the conversation."
Title:  
Title:  Felton started; and Milady felt she was lost if she did not come
Title:  to the assistance of the disconcerted Puritan.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you fear your prisoner should escape!" said she. "Well, ask
Title:  your worthy jailer what favor I this instant solicited of him."
Title:  
Title:  "You demanded a favor?" said the baron, suspiciously.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, my Lord," replied the young man, confused.
Title:  
Title:  "And what favor, pray?" asked Lord de Winter.
Title:  
Title:  "A knife, which she would return to me through the grating of the
Title:  door a minute after she had received it," replied Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "There is someone, then, concealed here whose throat this amiable
Title:  lady is desirous of cutting," said de Winter, in an ironical,
Title:  contemptuous tone.
Title:  
Title:  "There is myself," replied Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "I have given you the choice between America and Tyburn," replied
Title:  Lord de Winter.  "Choose Tyburn, madame.  Believe me, the cord is
Title:  more certain than the knife."
Title:  
Title:  Felton grew pale, and made a step forward, remembering that at
Title:  the moment he entered Milady had a rope in her hand.
Title:  
Title:  "You are right," said she, "I have often thought of it."  Then
Title:  she added in a low voice, "And I will think of it again."
Title:  
Title:  Felton felt a shudder run to the marrow of his bones; probably
Title:  Lord de Winter perceived this emotion.
Title:  
Title:  "Mistrust yourself, John," said he.  "I have placed reliance upon
Title:  you, my friend.  Beware!  I have warned you!  But be of good
Title:  courage, my lad; in three days we shall be delivered from this
Title:  creature, and where I shall send her she can harm nobody."
Title:  
Title:  "You hear him!" cried Milady, with vehemence, so that the baron
Title:  might believe she was addressing heaven, and that Felton might
Title:  understand she was addressing him.
Title:  
Title:  Felton lowered his head and reflected.
Title:  
Title:  The baron took the young officer by the arm, and turned his head
Title:  over his shoulder, so as not to lose sight of Milady till he was
Title:  gone out.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said the prisoner, when the door was shut, "I am not so
Title:  far advanced as I believed.  De Winter has changed his usual
Title:  stupidity into a strange prudence.  It is the desire of
Title:  vengeance, and how desire molds a man!  As to Felton, he
Title:  hesitates.  Ah, he is not a man like that cursed d'Artagnan.  A
Title:  Puritan only adores virgins, and he adores them by clasping his
Title:  hands.  A Musketeer loves women, and he loves them by clasping
Title:  his arms round them."
Title:  
Title:  Milady waited, then, with much impatience, for she feared the day
Title:  would pass away without her seeing Felton again.  At last, in an
Title:  hour after the scene we have just described, she heard someone
Title:  speaking in a low voice at the door.  Presently the door opened,
Title:  and she perceived Felton.
Title:  
Title:  The young man advanced rapidly into the chamber, leaving the door
Title:  open behind him, and making a sign to Milady to be silent; his
Title:  face was much agitated.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you want with me?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen," replied Felton, in a low voice.  "I have just sent away
Title:  the sentinel that I might remain here without anybody knowing it,
Title:  in order to speak to you without being overheard.  The baron has
Title:  just related a frightful story to me."
Title:  
Title:  Milady assumed her smile of a resigned victim, and shook her
Title:  head.
Title:  
Title:  "Either you are a demon," continued Felton, "or the baron--my
Title:  benefactor, my father--is a monster.  I have known you four days;
Title:  I have loved him four years.  I therefore may hesitate between
Title:  you.  Be not alarmed at what I say; I want to be convinced.
Title:  Tonight, after twelve, I will come and see you, and you shall
Title:  convince me."
Title:  
Title:  "No, Felton, no, my brother," said she; "the sacrifice is too
Title:  great, and I feel what it must cost you.  No, I am lost; do not
Title:  be lost with me.  My death will be much more eloquent than my
Title:  life, and the silence of the corpse will convince you much better
Title:  than the words of the prisoner."
Title:  
Title:  "Be silent, madame," cried Felton, "and do not speak to me thus;
Title:  I came to entreat you to promise me upon your honor, to swear to
Title:  me by what you hold most sacred, that you will make no attempt
Title:  upon your life."
Title:  
Title:  "I will not promise," said Milady, "for no one has more respect
Title:  for a promise or an oath than I have; and if I make a promise I
Title:  must keep it."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Felton, "only promise till you have seen me again.
Title:  If, when you have seen me again, you still persist--well, then
Title:  you shall be free, and I myself will give you the weapon you
Title:  desire."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Milady, "for you I will wait."
Title:  
Title:  "Swear."
Title:  
Title:  "I swear it, by our God.  Are you satisfied?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Felton, "till tonight."
Title:  
Title:  And he darted out of the room, shut the door, and waited in the
Title:  corridor, the soldier's half-pike in his hand, and as if he had
Title:  mounted guard in his place.
Title:  
Title:  The soldier returned, and Felton gave him back his weapon.
Title:  
Title:  Then, through the grating to which she had drawn near, Milady saw
Title:  the young man make a sign with delirious fervor, and depart in an
Title:  apparent transport of joy.
Title:  
Title:  As for her, she returned to her place with a smile of savage
Title:  contempt upon her lips, and repeated, blaspheming, that terrible
Title:  name of God, by whom she had just sworn without ever having
Title:  learned to know Him.
Title:  
Title:  "My God," said she, "what a senseless fanatic!  My God, it is I--
Title:  I--and this fellow who will help me to avenge myself."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  56  CAPTIVITY:  THE FIFTH DAY
Title:  
Title:  Milady had however achieved a half-triumph, and success doubled
Title:  her forces.
Title:  
Title:  It was not difficult to conquer, as she had hitherto done, men
Title:  prompt to let themselves be seduced, and whom the gallant
Title:  education of a court led quickly into her net.  Milady was
Title:  handsome enough not to find much resistance on the part of the
Title:  flesh, and she was sufficiently skillful to prevail over all the
Title:  obstacles of the mind.
Title:  
Title:  But this time she had to contend with an unpolished nature,
Title:  concentrated and insensible by force of austerity.  Religion and
Title:  its observances had made Felton a man inaccessible to ordinary
Title:  seductions.  There fermented in that sublimated brain plans so
Title:  vast, projects so tumultuous, that there remained no room for any
Title:  capricious or material love--that sentiment which is fed by
Title:  leisure and grows with corruption.  Milady had, then, made a
Title:  breach by her false virtue in the opinion of a man horribly
Title:  prejudiced against her, and by her beauty in the heart of a man
Title:  hitherto chaste and pure.  In short, she had taken the
Title:  measure of motives hitherto unknown to herself, through this
Title:  experiment, made upon the most rebellious subject that nature and
Title:  religion could submit to her study.
Title:  
Title:  Many a time, nevertheless, during the evening she despaired of
Title:  fate and of herself.  She did not invoke God, we very well know,
Title:  but she had faith in the genius of evil--that immense sovereignty
Title:  which reigns in all the details of human life, and by which, as
Title:  in the Arabian fable, a single pomegranate seed is sufficient to
Title:  reconstruct a ruined world.
Title:  
Title:  Milady, being well prepared for the reception of Felton, was able
Title:  to erect her batteries for the next day.  She knew she had only
Title:  two days left; that when once the order was signed by Buckingham--
Title:  and Buckingham would sign it the more readily from its bearing a
Title:  false name, and he could not, therefore, recognize the woman in
Title:  question--once this order was signed, we say, the baron would
Title:  make her embark immediately, and she knew very well that women
Title:  condemned to exile employ arms much less powerful in their
Title:  seductions than the pretendedly virtuous woman whose beauty is
Title:  lighted by the sun of the world, whose style the voice of fashion
Title:  lauds, and whom a halo of aristocracy gilds with enchanting
Title:  splendors.  To be a woman condemned to a painful and disgraceful
Title:  punishment is no impediment to beauty, but it is an obstacle to
Title:  the recovery of power.  Like all persons of real genius, Milady
Title:  knew what suited her nature and her means.  Poverty was repugnant
Title:  to her; degradation took away two-thirds of her greatness.
Title:  Milady was only a queen while among queens.  The pleasure of
Title:  satisfied pride was necessary to her domination.  To command
Title:  inferior beings was rather a humiliation than a pleasure for her.
Title:  
Title:  She should certainly return from her exile--she did not doubt
Title:  that a single instant; but how long might this exile last?  For
Title:  an active, ambitious nature, like that of Milady, days not spent
Title:  in climbing are inauspicious days.  What word, then, can be found
Title:  to describe the days which they occupy in descending?  To lose a
Title:  year, two years, three years, is to talk of an eternity; to
Title:  return after the death or disgrace of the cardinal, perhaps; to
Title:  return when d'Artagnan and his friends, happy and triumphant,
Title:  should have received from the queen the reward they had well
Title:  acquired by the services they had rendered her--these were
Title:  devouring ideas that a woman like Milady could not endure.  For
Title:  the rest, the storm which raged within her doubled her strength,
Title:  and she would have burst the walls of her prison if her body had
Title:  been able to take for a single instant the proportions of her
Title:  mind.
Title:  
Title:  Then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of all
Title:  this was the remembrance of the cardinal.  What must the
Title:  mistrustful, restless, suspicious cardinal think of her silence--
Title:  the cardinal, not merely her only support, her only prop, her
Title:  only protector at present, but still further, the principal
Title:  instrument of her future fortune and vengeance?  She knew him;
Title:  she knew that at her return from a fruitless journey it would be
Title:  in vain to tell him of her imprisonment, in vain to enlarge upon
Title:  the sufferings she had undergone.  The cardinal would reply, with
Title:  the sarcastic calmness of the skeptic, strong at once by power
Title:  and genius, "You should not have allowed yourself to be taken."
Title:  
Title:  Then Milady collected all her energies, murmuring in the depths
Title:  of her soul the name of Felton--the only beam of light that
Title:  penetrated to her in the hell into which she had fallen; and like
Title:  a serpent which folds and unfolds its rings to ascertain its
Title:  strength, she enveloped Felton beforehand in the thousand meshes
Title:  of her inventive imagination.
Title:  
Title:  Time, however, passed away; the hours, one after another, seemed
Title:  to awaken the clock as they passed, and every blow of the brass
Title:  hammer resounded upon the heart of the prisoner.  At nine
Title:  o'clock, Lord de Winter made his customary visit, examined the
Title:  window and the bars, sounded the floor and the walls, looked to
Title:  the chimney and the doors, without, during this long and minute
Title:  examination, he or Milady pronouncing a single word.
Title:  
Title:  Doubtless both of them understood that the situation had become
Title:  too serious to lose time in useless words and aimless wrath.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said the baron, on leaving her "you will not escape
Title:  tonight!"
Title:  
Title:  At ten o'clock Felton came and placed the sentinel.  Milady
Title:  recognized his step.  She was as well acquainted with it now as a
Title:  mistress is with that of the lover of her heart; and yet Milady
Title:  at the same time detested and despised this weak fanatic.
Title:  
Title:  That was not the appointed hour.  Felton did not enter.
Title:  
Title:  Two hours after, as midnight sounded, the sentinel was relieved.
Title:  This time it WAS the hour, and from this moment Milady waited
Title:  with impatience.  The new sentinel commenced his walk in the
Title:  corridor.  At the expiration of ten minutes Felton came.
Title:  
Title:  Milady was all attention.
Title:  
Title:  "Listen," said the young man to the sentinel.  "On no pretense
Title:  leave the door, for you know that last night my Lord punished a
Title:  soldier for having quit his post for an instant, although I,
Title:  during his absence, watched in his place."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I know it," said the soldier.
Title:  
Title:  "I recommend you therefore to keep the strictest watch.  For my
Title:  part I am going to pay a second visit to this woman, who I fear
Title:  entertains sinister intentions upon her own life, and I have
Title:  received orders to watch her."
Title:  
Title:  "Good!" murmured Milady; "the austere Puritan lies."
Title:  
Title:  As to the soldier, he only smiled.
Title:  
Title:  "Zounds, Lieutenant!" said he; "you are not unlucky in being
Title:  charged with such commissions, particularly if my Lord has
Title:  authorized you to look into her bed."
Title:  
Title:  Felton blushed.  Under any other circumstances he would have
Title:  reprimanded the soldier for indulging in such pleasantry, but his
Title:  conscience murmured too loud for his mouth to dare speak.
Title:  
Title:  "If I call, come," said he.  "If anyone comes, call me."
Title:  
Title:  "I will, Lieutenant," said the soldier.
Title:  
Title:  Felton entered Milady's apartment.  Milady arose.
Title:  
Title:  "You are here!" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "I promised to come," said Felton, "and I have come."
Title:  
Title:  "You promised me something else."
Title:  
Title:  "What, my God!" said the young man, who in spite of his self-
Title:  command felt his knees tremble and the sweat start from his brow.
Title:  
Title:  "You promised to bring a knife, and to leave it with me after our
Title:  interview."
Title:  
Title:  "Say no more of that, madame," said Felton.  "There is no
Title:  situation, however terrible it may be, which can authorize a
Title:  creature of God to inflict death upon himself.  I have reflected,
Title:  and I cannot, must not be guilty of such a sin."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you have reflected!" said the prisoner, sitting down in her
Title:  armchair, with a smile of disdain; "and I also have reflected."
Title:  
Title:  "Upon what?"
Title:  
Title:  "That I can have nothing to say to a man who does not keep his
Title:  word."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!" murmured Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "You may retire," said Milady.  "I will not talk."
Title:  
Title:  "Here is the knife," said Felton, drawing from his pocket the
Title:  weapon which he had brought, according to his promise, but which
Title:  he hesitated to give to his prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  "Let me see it," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "For what purpose?"
Title:  
Title:  "Upon my honor, I will instantly return it to you.  You shall
Title:  place it on that table, and you may remain between it and me."
Title:  
Title:  Felton offered the weapon to Milady, who examined the temper of
Title:  it attentively, and who tried the point on the tip of her finger.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said she, returning the knife to the young officer, "this
Title:  is fine and good steel.  You are a faithful friend, Felton."
Title:  
Title:  Felton took back the weapon, and laid it upon the table, as he
Title:  had agreed with the prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  Milady followed him with her eyes, and made a gesture of
Title:  satisfaction.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said she, "listen to me."
Title:  
Title:  The request was needless.  The young officer stood upright before
Title:  her, awaiting her words as if to devour them.
Title:  
Title:  "Felton," said Milady, with a solemnity full of melancholy,
Title:  "imagine that your sister, the daughter of your father, speaks to
Title:  you.  While yet young, unfortunately handsome, I was dragged into
Title:  a snare.  I resisted.  Ambushes and violences multiplied around
Title:  me, but I resisted.  The religion I serve, the God I adore, were
Title:  blasphemed because I called upon that religion and that God, but
Title:  still I resisted.  Then outrages were heaped upon me, and as my
Title:  soul was not subdued they wished to defile my body forever.
Title:  Finally--"
Title:  
Title:  Milady stopped, and a bitter smile passed over her lips.
Title:  
Title:  "Finally," said Felton, "finally, what did they do?"
Title:  
Title:  "At length, one evening my enemy resolved to paralyze the
Title:  resistance he could not conquer.  One evening he mixed a powerful
Title:  narcotic with my water.  Scarcely had I finished my repast, when
Title:  I felt myself sink by degrees into a strange torpor.  Although I
Title:  was without mistrust, a vague fear seized me, and I tried to
Title:  struggle against sleepiness.  I arose.  I wished to run to the
Title:  window and call for help, but my legs refused their office.  It
Title:  appeared as if the ceiling sank upon my head and crushed me with
Title:  its weight.  I stretched out my arms.  I tried to speak.  I could
Title:  only utter inarticulate sounds, and irresistible faintness came
Title:  over me.  I supported myself by a chair, feeling that I was about
Title:  to fall, but this support was soon insufficient on account of my
Title:  weak arms.  I fell upon one knee, then upon both.  I tried to
Title:  pray, but my tongue was frozen.  God doubtless neither heard nor
Title:  saw me, and I sank upon the floor a prey to a slumber which
Title:  resembled death.
Title:  
Title:  "Of all that passed in that sleep, or the time which glided away
Title:  while it lasted, I have no remembrance.  The only thing I
Title:  recollect is that I awoke in bed in a round chamber, the
Title:  furniture of which was sumptuous, and into which light only
Title:  penetrated by an opening in the ceiling.  No door gave entrance
Title:  to the room.  It might be called a magnificent prison.
Title:  
Title:  "It was a long time before I was able to make out what place I
Title:  was in, or to take account of the details I describe.  My mind
Title:  appeared to strive in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of the
Title:  sleep from which I could not rouse myself.  I had vague
Title:  perceptions of space traversed, of the rolling of a carriage, of
Title:  a horrible dream in which my strength had become exhausted; but
Title:  all this was so dark and so indistinct in my mind that these
Title:  events seemed to belong to another life than mine, and yet mixed
Title:  with mine in fantastic duality.
Title:  
Title:  "At times the state into which I had fallen appeared so strange
Title:  that I believed myself dreaming.  I arose trembling.  My clothes
Title:  were near me on a chair; I neither remembered having undressed
Title:  myself nor going to bed.  Then by degrees the reality broke upon
Title:  me, full of chaste terrors.  I was no longer in the house where I
Title:  had dwelt.  As well as I could judge by the light of the sun, the
Title:  day was already two-thirds gone.  It was the evening before when
Title:  I had fallen asleep; my sleep, then, must have lasted twenty-four
Title:  hours!  What had taken place during this long sleep?
Title:  
Title:  "I dressed myself as quickly as possible; my slow and stiff
Title:  motions all attested that the effects of the narcotic were not
Title:  yet entirely dissipated.  The chamber was evidently furnished for
Title:  the reception of a woman; and the most finished coquette could
Title:  not have formed a wish, but on casting her eyes about the
Title:  apartment, she would have found that wish accomplished.
Title:  
Title:  "Certainly I was not the first captive that had been shut up in
Title:  this splendid prison; but you may easily comprehend, Felton, that
Title:  the more superb the prison, the greater was my terror.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, it was a prison, for I tried in vain to get out of it.  I
Title:  sounded all the walls, in the hopes of discovering a door, but
Title:  everywhere the walls returned a full and flat sound.
Title:  
Title:  "I made the tour of the room at least twenty times, in search of
Title:  an outlet of some kind; but there was none.  I sank exhausted
Title:  with fatigue and terror into an armchair.
Title:  
Title:  "Meantime, night came on rapidly, and with night my terrors
Title:  increased.  I did not know but I had better remain where I was
Title:  seated.  It appeared that I was surrounded with unknown dangers
Title:  into which I was about to fall at every instant.  Although I had
Title:  eaten nothing since the evening before, my fears prevented my
Title:  feeling hunger.
Title:  
Title:  "No noise from without by which I could measure the time reached
Title:  me; I only supposed it must be seven or eight o'clock in the
Title:  evening, for it was in the month of October and it was quite
Title:  dark.
Title:  
Title:  "All at once the noise of a door, turning on its hinges, made me
Title:  start.  A globe of fire appeared above the glazed opening of the
Title:  ceiling, casting a strong light into my chamber; and I perceived
Title:  with terror that a man was standing within a few paces of me.
Title:  
Title:  "A table, with two covers, bearing a supper ready prepared,
Title:  stood, as if by magic, in the middle of the apartment.
Title:  
Title:  "That man was he who had pursued me during a whole year, who had
Title:  vowed my dishonor, and who, by the first words that issued from
Title:  his mouth, gave me to understand he had accomplished it the
Title:  preceding night."
Title:  
Title:  "Scoundrel!" murmured Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, scoundrel!" cried Milady, seeing the interest which the
Title:  young officer, whose soul seemed to hang on her lips, took in
Title:  this strange recital.  "Oh, yes, scoundrel!  He believed, having
Title:  triumphed over me in my sleep, that all was completed.  He came,
Title:  hoping that I would accept my shame, as my shame was consummated;
Title:  he came to offer his fortune in exchange for my love.
Title:  
Title:  "All that the heart of a woman could contain of haughty contempt
Title:  and disdainful words, I poured out upon this man.  Doubtless he
Title:  was accustomed to such reproaches, for he listened to me calm and
Title:  smiling, with his arms crossed over his breast.  Then, when he
Title:  thought I had said all, he advanced toward me; I sprang toward
Title:  the table, I seized a knife, I placed it to my breast.
Title:  
Title:  "Take one step more," said I, "and in addition to my dishonor,
Title:  you shall have my death to reproach yourself with."
Title:  
Title:  "There was, no doubt, in my look, my voice, my whole person, that
Title:  sincerity of gesture, of attitude, of accent, which carries
Title:  conviction to the most perverse minds, for he paused.
Title:  
Title:  "'Your death?' said he; 'oh, no, you are too charming a mistress
Title:  to allow me to consent to lose you thus, after I have had the
Title:  happiness to possess you only a single time.  Adieu, my charmer;
Title:  I will wait to pay you my next visit till you are in a better
Title:  humor.'
Title:  
Title:  "At these words he blew a whistle; the globe of fire which
Title:  lighted the room reascended and disappeared.  I found myself
Title:  again in complete darkness.  The same noise of a door opening and
Title:  shutting was repeated the instant afterward; the flaming globe
Title:  descended afresh, and I was completely alone.
Title:  
Title:  "This moment was frightful; if I had any doubts as to my
Title:  misfortune, these doubts had vanished in an overwhelming reality.
Title:  I was in the power of a man whom I not only detested, but
Title:  despised--of a man capable of anything, and who had already given
Title:  me a fatal proof of what he was able to do."
Title:  
Title:  "But who, then was this man?" asked Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "I passed the night on a chair, starting at the least noise, for
Title:  toward midnight the lamp went out, and I was again in darkness.
Title:  But the night passed away without any fresh attempt on the part
Title:  of my persecutor.  Day came; the table had disappeared, only I
Title:  had still the knife in my hand.
Title:  
Title:  "This knife was my only hope.
Title:  
Title:  "I was worn out with fatigue.  Sleeplessness inflamed my eyes; I
Title:  had not dared to sleep a single instant.  The light of day
Title:  reassured me; I went and threw myself on the bed, without parting
Title:  with the emancipating knife, which I concealed under my pillow.
Title:  
Title:  "When I awoke, a fresh meal was served.
Title:  
Title:  "This time, in spite of my terrors, in spite of my agony, I began
Title:  to feel a devouring hunger.  It was forty-eight hours since I had
Title:  taken any nourishment.  I ate some bread and some fruit; then,
Title:  remembering the narcotic mixed with the water I had drunk, I
Title:  would not touch that which was placed on the table, but filled my
Title:  glass at a marble fountain fixed in the wall over my dressing
Title:  table.
Title:  
Title:  "And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for some
Title:  time in a terrible agitation of mind.  But my fears were this
Title:  time ill-founded; I passed the day without experiencing anything
Title:  of the kind I dreaded.
Title:  
Title:  "I took the precaution to half empty the carafe, in order that my
Title:  suspicions might not be noticed.
Title:  
Title:  "The evening came on, and with it darkness; but however profound
Title:  was this darkness, my eyes began to accustom themselves to it.  I
Title:  saw, amid the shadows, the table sink through the floor; a
Title:  quarter of an hour later it reappeared, bearing my supper.  In an
Title:  instant, thanks to the lamp, my chamber was once more lighted.
Title:  
Title:  "I was determined to eat only such things as could not possibly
Title:  have anything soporific introduced into them.  Two eggs and some
Title:  fruit composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water from
Title:  my protecting fountain, and drank it.
Title:  
Title:  "At the first swallow, it appeared to me not to have the same
Title:  taste as in the morning.  Suspicion instantly seized me.  I
Title:  paused, but I had already drunk half a glass.
Title:  
Title:  "I threw the rest away with horror, and waited, with the dew of
Title:  fear upon my brow.
Title:  
Title:  "No doubt some invisible witness had seen me draw the water from
Title:  that fountain, and had taken advantage of my confidence in it,
Title:  the better to assure my ruin, so coolly resolved upon, so cruelly
Title:  pursued.
Title:  
Title:  "Half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began to
Title:  appear; but as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, I
Title:  contended longer, and instead of falling entirely asleep, I sank
Title:  into a state of drowsiness which left me a perception of what was
Title:  passing around me, while depriving me of the strength either to
Title:  defend myself or to fly.
Title:  
Title:  "I dragged myself toward the bed, to seek the only defense I had
Title:  left--my saving knife; but I could not reach the bolster.  I sank
Title:  on my knees, my hands clasped round one of the bedposts; then I
Title:  felt that I was lost."
Title:  
Title:  Felton became frightfully pale, and a convulsive tremor crept
Title:  through his whole body.
Title:  
Title:  "And what was most frightful," continued Milady, her voice
Title:  altered, as if she still experienced the same agony as at that
Title:  awful minute, "was that at this time I retained a consciousness
Title:  of the danger that threatened me; was that my soul, if I may say
Title:  so, waked in my sleeping body; was that I saw, that I heard.  It
Title:  is true that all was like a dream, but it was not the less
Title:  frightful.
Title:  
Title:  "I saw the lamp ascend, and leave me in darkness; then I heard
Title:  the well-known creaking of the door although I had heard that
Title:  door open but twice.
Title:  
Title:  "I felt instinctively that someone approached me; it is said that
Title:  the doomed wretch in the deserts of America thus feels the
Title:  approach of the serpent.
Title:  
Title:  "I wished to make an effort; I attempted to cry out.  By an
Title:  incredible effort of will I even raised myself up, but only to
Title:  sink down again immediately, and to fall into the arms of my
Title:  persecutor."
Title:  
Title:  "Tell me who this man was!" cried the young officer.
Title:  
Title:  Milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings she
Title:  inspired in Felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital;
Title:  but she would not spare him a single pang.  The more profoundly
Title:  she wounded his heart, the more certainly he would avenge her.
Title:  She continued, then, as if she had not heard his exclamation, or
Title:  as if she thought the moment was not yet come to reply to it.
Title:  
Title:  "Only this time it was no longer an inert body, without feeling,
Title:  that the villain had to deal with.  I have told you that without
Title:  being able to regain the complete exercise of my faculties, I
Title:  retained the sense of my danger.  I struggled, then, with all my
Title:  strength, and doubtless opposed, weak as I was, a long
Title:  resistance, for I heard him cry out, 'These miserable Puritans!
Title:  I knew very well that they tired out their executioners, but I
Title:  did not believe them so strong against their lovers!'
Title:  
Title:  "Alas! this desperate resistance could not last long.  I felt my
Title:  strength fail, and this time it was not my sleep that enabled the
Title:  coward to prevail, but my swoon."
Title:  
Title:  Felton listened without uttering any word or sound, except an
Title:  inward expression of agony.  The sweat streamed down his marble
Title:  forehead, and his hand, under his coat, tore his breast.
Title:  
Title:  "My first impulse, on coming to myself, was to feel under my
Title:  pillow for the knife I had not been able to reach; if it had not
Title:  been useful for defense, it might at least serve for expiation.
Title:  
Title:  "But on taking this knife, Felton, a terrible idea occurred to
Title:  me.  I have sworn to tell you all, and I will tell you all.  I
Title:  have promised you the truth; I will tell it, were it to destroy
Title:  me."
Title:  
Title:  "The idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man, did
Title:  it not?" cried Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Milady.  "The idea was not that of a Christian, I
Title:  knew; but without doubt, that eternal enemy of our souls, that
Title:  lion roaring constantly around us, breathed it into my mind.  In
Title:  short, what shall I say to you, Felton?" continued Milady, in the
Title:  tone of a woman accusing herself of a crime.  "This idea occurred
Title:  to me, and did not leave me; it is of this homicidal thought that
Title:  I now bear the punishment."
Title:  
Title:  "Continue, continue!" said Felton; "I am eager to see you attain
Title:  your vengeance!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I resolved that it should take place as soon as possible.  I
Title:  had no doubt he would return the following night.  During the day
Title:  I had nothing to fear.
Title:  
Title:  "When the hour of breakfast came, therefore, I did not hesitate
Title:  to eat and drink.  I had determined to make believe sup, but to
Title:  eat nothing.  I was forced, then, to combat the fast of the
Title:  evening with the nourishment of the morning.
Title:  
Title:  "Only I concealed a glass of water, which remained after my
Title:  breakfast, thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when I
Title:  remained forty-eight hours without eating or drinking.
Title:  
Title:  "The day passed away without having any other influence on me
Title:  than to strengthen the resolution I had formed; only I took care
Title:  that my face should not betray the thoughts of my heart, for I
Title:  had no doubt I was watched.  Several times, even, I felt a smile
Title:  on my lips.  Felton, I dare not tell you at what idea I smiled;
Title:  you would hold me in horror--"
Title:  
Title:  "Go on! go on!" said Felton; "you see plainly that I listen, and
Title:  that I am anxious to know the end."
Title:  
Title:  "Evening came; the ordinary events took place.  During the
Title:  darkness, as before, my supper was brought.  Then the lamp was
Title:  lighted, and I sat down to table.  I only ate some fruit.  I
Title:  pretended to pour out water from the jug, but I only drank that
Title:  which I had saved in my glass.  The substitution was made so
Title:  carefully that my spies, if I had any, could have no suspicion of
Title:  it.
Title:  
Title:  "After supper I exhibited the same marks of languor as on the
Title:  preceding evening; but this time, as I yielded to fatigue, or as
Title:  if I had become familiarized with danger, I dragged myself toward
Title:  my bed, let my robe fall, and lay down.
Title:  
Title:  "I found my knife where I had placed it, under my pillow, and
Title:  while feigning to sleep, my hand grasped the handle of it
Title:  convulsively.
Title:  
Title:  "Two hours passed away without anything fresh happening.  Oh, my
Title:  God! who could have said so the evening before?  I began to fear
Title:  that he would not come.
Title:  
Title:  "At length I saw the lamp rise softly, and disappear in the
Title:  depths of the ceiling; my chamber was filled with darkness and
Title:  obscurity, but I made a strong effort to penetrate this darkness
Title:  and obscurity.
Title:  
Title:  "Nearly ten minutes passed; I heard no other noise but the
Title:  beating of my own heart.  I implored heaven that he might come.
Title:  
Title:  "At length I heard the well-known noise of the door, which opened
Title:  and shut; I heard, notwithstanding the thickness of the carpet, a
Title:  step which made the floor creak; I saw, notwithstanding the
Title:  darkness, a shadow which approached my bed."
Title:  
Title:  "Haste! haste!" said Felton; "do you not see that each of your
Title:  words burns me like molten lead?"
Title:  
Title:  "Then," continued Milady, "then I collected all my strength; I
Title:  recalled to my mind that the moment of vengeance, or rather, of
Title:  justice, had struck.  I looked upon myself as another Judith; I
Title:  gathered myself up, my knife in my hand, and when I saw him near
Title:  me, stretching out his arms to find his victim, then, with the
Title:  last cry of agony and despair, I struck him in the middle of his
Title:  breast.
Title:  
Title:  "The miserable villain!  He had foreseen all.  His breast was
Title:  covered with a coat-of-mail; the knife was bent against it.
Title:  
Title:  "'Ah, ah!' cried he, seizing my arm, and wresting from me the
Title:  weapon that had so badly served me, 'you want to take my life, do
Title:  you, my pretty Puritan?  But that's more than dislike, that's
Title:  ingratitude!  Come, come, calm yourself, my sweet girl!  I
Title:  thought you had softened.  I am not one of those tyrants who
Title:  detain women by force.  You don't love me.  With my usual fatuity
Title:  I doubted it; now I am convinced.  Tomorrow you shall be free.'
Title:  
Title:  "I had but one wish; that was that he should kill me.
Title:  
Title:  "'Beware!' said I, 'for my liberty is your dishonor.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Explain yourself, my pretty sibyl!'
Title:  
Title:  "'Yes; for as soon as I leave this place I will tell everything.
Title:  I will proclaim the violence you have used toward me.  I will
Title:  describe my captivity.  I will denounce this place of infamy.
Title:  You are placed on high, my Lord, but tremble!  Above you there is
Title:  the king; above the king there is God!'
Title:  
Title:  "However perfect master he was over himself, my persecutor
Title:  allowed a movement of anger to escape him.  I could not see the
Title:  expression of his countenance, but I felt the arm tremble upon
Title:  which my hand was placed.
Title:  
Title:  "'Then you shall not leave this place,' said he.
Title:  
Title:  "'Very well,' cried I, 'then the place of my punishment will be
Title:  that of my tomb.  I will die here, and you will see if a phantom
Title:  that accuses is not more terrible than a living being that
Title:  threatens!'
Title:  
Title:  "'You shall have no weapon left in your power.'
Title:  
Title:  "'There is a weapon which despair has placed within the reach of
Title:  every creature who has the courage to use it.  I will allow
Title:  myself to die with hunger.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Come,' said the wretch, 'is not peace much better than such a
Title:  war as that?  I will restore you to liberty this moment; I will
Title:  proclaim you a piece of immaculate virtue; I will name you the
Title:  Lucretia of England.'
Title:  
Title:  "'And I will say that you are the Sextus.  I will denounce you
Title:  before men, as I have denounced you before God; and if it be
Title:  necessary that, like Lucretia, I should sign my accusation with
Title:  my blood, I will sign it.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Ah!' said my enemy, in a jeering tone, 'that's quite another
Title:  thing.  My faith! everything considered, you are very well off
Title:  here.  You shall want for nothing, and if you let yourself die of
Title:  hunger that will be your own fault.'
Title:  
Title:  "At these words he retired.  I heard the door open and shut, and
Title:  I remained overwhelmed, less, I confess it, by my grief than by
Title:  the mortification of not having avenged myself.
Title:  
Title:  "He kept his word.  All the day, all the next night passed away
Title:  without my seeing him again.  But I also kept my word with him,
Title:  and I neither ate nor drank.  I was, as I told him, resolved to
Title:  die of hunger.
Title:  
Title:  "I passed the day and the night in prayer, for I hoped that God
Title:  would pardon me my suicide.
Title:  
Title:  "The second night the door opened; I was lying on the floor, for
Title:  my strength began to abandon me.
Title:  
Title:  "At the noise I raised myself up on one hand.
Title:  
Title:  "'Well,' said a voice which vibrated in too terrible a manner in
Title:  my ear not to be recognized, 'well!  Are we softened a little?
Title:  Will we not pay for our liberty with a single promise of silence?
Title:  Come, I am a good sort of a prince,' added he, 'and although I
Title:  like not Puritans I do them justice; and it is the same with
Title:  Puritanesses, when they are pretty.  Come, take a little oath for
Title:  me on the cross; I won't ask anything more of you.'
Title:  
Title:  "'On the cross,' cried I, rising, for at that abhorred voice I
Title:  had recovered all my strength, 'on the cross I swear that no
Title:  promise, no menace, no force, no torture, shall close my mouth!
Title:  On the cross I swear to denounce you everywhere as a murderer, as
Title:  a thief of honor, as a base coward!  On the cross I swear, if I
Title:  ever leave this place, to call down vengeance upon you from the
Title:  whole human race!'
Title:  
Title:  "'Beware!' said the voice, in a threatening accent that I had
Title:  never yet heard.  'I have an extraordinary means which I will not
Title:  employ but in the last extremity to close your mouth, or at least
Title:  to prevent anyone from believing a word you may utter.'
Title:  
Title:  "I mustered all my strength to reply to him with a burst of
Title:  laughter.
Title:  
Title:  "He saw that it was a merciless war between us--a war to the
Title:  death.
Title:  
Title:  "'Listen!' said he. 'I give you the rest of tonight and all day
Title:  tomorrow.  Reflect:  promise to be silent, and riches,
Title:  consideration, even honor, shall surround you; threaten to speak,
Title:  and I will condemn you to infamy.'
Title:  
Title:  "'You?' cried I. 'You?'
Title:  
Title:  "'To interminable, ineffaceable infamy!'
Title:  
Title:  "'You?' repeated I.  Oh, I declare to you, Felton, I thought him
Title:  mad!
Title:  
Title:  "'Yes, yes, I!' replied he.
Title:  
Title:  "'Oh, leave me!' said I. 'Begone, if you do not desire to see me
Title:  dash my head against that wall before your eyes!'
Title:  
Title:  "'Very well, it is your own doing.  Till tomorrow evening, then!'
Title:  
Title:  "'Till tomorrow evening, then!' replied I, allowing myself to
Title:  fall, and biting the carpet with rage."
Title:  
Title:  Felton leaned for support upon a piece of furniture; and Milady
Title:  saw, with the joy of a demon, that his strength would fail him
Title:  perhaps before the end of her recital.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  57  MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY
Title:  
Title:  After a moment of silence employed by Milady in observing the
Title:  young man who listened to her, Milady continued her recital.
Title:  
Title:  "It was nearly three days since I had eaten or drunk anything.  I
Title:  suffered frightful torments.  At times there passed before me
Title:  clouds which pressed my brow, which veiled my eyes; this was
Title:  delirium.
Title:  
Title:  "When the evening came I was so weak that every time I fainted I
Title:  thanked God, for I thought I was about to die.
Title:  
Title:  "In the midst of one of these swoons I heard the door open.
Title:  Terror recalled me to myself.
Title:  
Title:  "He entered the apartment followed by a man in a mask.  He was
Title:  masked likewise; but I knew his step, I knew his voice, I knew
Title:  him by that imposing bearing which hell has bestowed upon his
Title:  person for the curse of humanity.
Title:  
Title:  "'Well,' said he to me, 'have you made your mind up to take the
Title:  oath I requested of you?'
Title:  
Title:  "'You have said Puritans have but one word.  Mine you have heard,
Title:  and that is to pursue you--on earth to the tribunal of men, in
Title:  heaven to the tribunal of God.'
Title:  
Title:  "'You persist, then?'
Title:  
Title:  "'I swear it before the God who hears me.  I will take the whole
Title:  world as a witness of your crime, and that until I have found an
Title:  avenger.'
Title:  
Title:  "'You are a prostitute,' said he, in a voice of thunder, 'and you
Title:  shall undergo the punishment of prostitutes!  Branded in the eyes
Title:  of the world you invoke, try to prove to that world that you are
Title:  neither guilty nor mad!'
Title:  
Title:  "Then, addressing the man who accompanied him, 'Executioner,'
Title:  said he, 'do your duty.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, his name, his name!" cried Felton.  "His name, tell it me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Then in spite of my cries, in spite of my resistance--for I
Title:  began to comprehend that there was a question of something worse
Title:  than death--the executioner seized me, threw me on the floor,
Title:  fastened me with his bonds, and suffocated by sobs, almost
Title:  without sense, invoking God, who did not listen to me, I uttered
Title:  all at once a frightful cry of pain and shame.  A burning fire, a
Title:  red-hot iron, the iron of the executioner, was imprinted on my
Title:  shoulder."
Title:  
Title:  Felton uttered a groan.
Title:  
Title:  "Here," said Milady, rising with the majesty of a queen, "here,
Title:  Felton, behold the new martyrdom invented for a pure young girl,
Title:  the victim of the brutality of a villain.  Learn to know the
Title:  heart of men, and henceforth make yourself less easily the
Title:  instrument of their unjust vengeance."
Title:  
Title:  Milady, with a rapid gesture, opened her robe, tore the cambric
Title:  that covered her bosom, and red with feigned anger and simulated
Title:  shame, showed the young man the ineffaceable impression which
Title:  dishonored that beautiful shoulder.
Title:  
Title:  "But," cried Felton, "that is a FLEUR-DE-LIS which I see there."
Title:  
Title:  "And therein consisted the infamy," replied Milady.  "The brand
Title:  of England!--it would be necessary to prove what tribunal had
Title:  imposed it on me, and I could have made a public appeal to all
Title:  the tribunals of the kingdom; but the brand of France!--oh, by
Title:  that, by THAT I was branded indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  This was too much for Felton.
Title:  
Title:  Pale, motionless, overwhelmed by this frightful revelation,
Title:  dazzled by the superhuman beauty of this woman who unveiled
Title:  herself before him with an immodesty which appeared to him
Title:  sublime, he ended by falling on his knees before her as the early
Title:  Christians did before those pure and holy martyrs whom the
Title:  persecution of the emperors gave up in the circus to the
Title:  sanguinary sensuality of the populace.  The brand disappeared;
Title:  the beauty alone remained.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon!  Pardon!" cried Felton, "oh, pardon!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady read in his eyes LOVE! LOVE!
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon for what?" asked she.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon me for having joined with your persecutors."
Title:  
Title:  Milady held out her hand to him.
Title:  
Title:  "So beautiful! so young!" cried Felton, covering that hand with
Title:  his kisses.
Title:  
Title:  Milady let one of those looks fall upon him which make a slave of
Title:  a king.
Title:  
Title:  Felton was a Puritan; he abandoned the hand of this woman to kiss
Title:  her feet.
Title:  
Title:  He no longer loved her; he adored her.
Title:  
Title:  When this crisis was past, when Milady appeared to have resumed
Title:  her self-possession, which she had never lost; when Felton had
Title:  seen her recover with the veil of chastity those treasures of
Title:  love which were only concealed from him to make him desire them
Title:  the more ardently, he said, "Ah, now!  I have only one thing to
Title:  ask of you; that is, the name of your true executioner.  For to
Title:  me there is but one; the other was an instrument, that was all."
Title:  
Title:  "What, brother!" cried Milady, "must I name him again?  Have you
Title:  not yet divined who he is?"
Title:  
Title:  "What?" cried Felton, "he--again he--always he?  What--the truly
Title:  guilty?"
Title:  
Title:  "The truly guilty," said Milady, "is the ravager of England, the
Title:  persecutor of true believers, the base ravisher of the honor of
Title:  so many women--he who, to satisfy a caprice of his corrupt heart,
Title:  is about to make England shed so much blood, who protects the
Title:  Protestants today and will betray them tomorrow--"
Title:  
Title:  "Buckingham!  It is, then, Buckingham!" cried Felton, in a high
Title:  state of excitement.
Title:  
Title:  Milady concealed her face in her hands, as if she could not
Title:  endure the shame which this name recalled to her.
Title:  
Title:  "Buckingham, the executioner of this angelic creature!" cried
Title:  Felton.  "And thou hast not hurled thy thunder at him, my God!
Title:  And thou hast left him noble, honored, powerful, for the ruin of
Title:  us all!"
Title:  
Title:  "God abandons him who abandons himself," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "But he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for the
Title:  damned!" said Felton, with increasing exultation.  "He wills that
Title:  human vengeance should precede celestial justice."
Title:  
Title:  "Men fear him and spare him."
Title:  
Title:  "I," said Felton, "I do not fear him, nor will I spare him."
Title:  
Title:  The soul of Milady was bathed in an infernal joy.
Title:  
Title:  "But how can Lord de Winter, my protector, my father," asked
Title:  Felton, "possibly be mixed up with all this?"
Title:  
Title:  "Listen, Felton," resumed Milady, "for by the side of base and
Title:  contemptible men there are often found great and generous
Title:  natures.  I had an affianced husband, a man whom I loved, and who
Title:  loved me--a heart like yours, Felton, a man like you.  I went to
Title:  him and told him all; he knew me, that man did, and did not doubt
Title:  an instant.  He was a nobleman, a man equal to Buckingham in
Title:  every respect.  He said nothing; he only girded on his sword,
Title:  wrapped himself in his cloak, and went straight to Buckingham
Title:  Palace.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," said Felton; "I understand how he would act.  But
Title:  with such men it is not the sword that should be employed; it is
Title:  the poniard."
Title:  
Title:  "Buckingham had left England the day before, sent as ambassador
Title:  to Spain, to demand the hand of the Infanta for King Charles I,
Title:  who was then only Prince of Wales.  My affianced husband
Title:  returned.
Title:  
Title:  "'Hear me,' said he; 'this man has gone, and for the moment has
Title:  consequently escaped my vengeance; but let us be united, as we
Title:  were to have been, and then leave it to Lord de Winter to
Title:  maintain his own honor and that of his wife.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Lord de Winter!" cried Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Milady, "Lord de Winter; and now you can understand
Title:  it all, can you not?  Buckingham remained nearly a year absent.
Title:  A week before his return Lord de Winter died, leaving me his sole
Title:  heir.  Whence came the blow?  God who knows all, knows without
Title:  doubt; but as for me, I accuse nobody."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, what an abyss; what an abyss!" cried Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Lord de Winter died without revealing anything to his brother.
Title:  The terrible secret was to be concealed till it burst, like a
Title:  clap of thunder, over the head of the guilty.  Your protector had
Title:  seen with pain this marriage of his elder brother with a
Title:  portionless girl.  I was sensible that I could look for no
Title:  support from a man disappointed in his hopes of an inheritance.
Title:  I went to France, with a determination to remain there for the
Title:  rest of my life.  But all my fortune is in England.
Title:  Communication being closed by the war, I was in want of
Title:  everything.  I was then obliged to come back again.  Six days
Title:  ago, I landed at Portsmouth."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?" said Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Well; Buckingham heard by some means, no doubt, of my return.
Title:  He spoke of me to Lord de Winter, already prejudiced against me,
Title:  and told him that his sister-in-law was a prostitute, a branded
Title:  woman.  The noble and pure voice of my husband was no longer here
Title:  to defend me.  Lord de Winter believed all that was told him with
Title:  so much the more ease that it was his interest to believe it.  He
Title:  caused me to be arrested, had me conducted hither, and placed me
Title:  under your guard.  You know the rest.  The day after tomorrow he
Title:  banishes me, he transports me; the day after tomorrow he exiles
Title:  me among the infamous.  Oh, the train is well laid; the plot is
Title:  clever.  My honor will not survive it!  You see, then, Felton, I
Title:  can do nothing but die.  Felton, give me that knife!"
Title:  
Title:  And at these words, as if all her strength was exhausted, Milady
Title:  sank, weak and languishing, into the arms of the young officer,
Title:  who, intoxicated with love, anger, and voluptuous sensations
Title:  hitherto unknown, received her with transport, pressed her
Title:  against his heart, all trembling at the breath from that charming
Title:  mouth, bewildered by the contact with that palpitating bosom.
Title:  
Title:  "No, no," said he.  "No, you shall live honored and pure; you
Title:  shall live to triumph over your enemies."
Title:  
Title:  Milady put him from her slowly with her hand, while drawing him
Title:  nearer with her look; but Felton, in his turn, embraced her more
Title:  closely, imploring her like a divinity.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, death, death!" said she, lowering her voice and her eyelids,
Title:  "oh, death, rather than shame!  Felton, my brother, my friend, I
Title:  conjure you!"
Title:  
Title:  "No," cried Felton, "no; you shall live and you shall be
Title:  avenged."
Title:  
Title:  "Felton, I bring misfortune to all who surround me!  Felton,
Title:  abandon me!  Felton, let me die!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, we will live and die together!" cried he, pressing
Title:  his lips to those of the prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  Several strokes resounded on the door; this time Milady really
Title:  pushed him away from her.
Title:  
Title:  "Hark," said she, "we have been overheard!  Someone is coming!
Title:  All is over!  We are lost!"
Title:  
Title:  "No," said Felton; it is only the sentinel warning me that they
Title:  are about to change the guard."
Title:  
Title:  "Then run to the door, and open it yourself."
Title:  
Title:  Felton obeyed; this woman was now his whole thought, his whole
Title:  soul.
Title:  
Title:  He found himself face to face with a sergeant commanding a watch-
Title:  patrol.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what is the matter?" asked the young lieutenant.
Title:  
Title:  "You told me to open the door if I heard anyone cry out," said
Title:  the soldier; "but you forgot to leave me the key.  I heard you
Title:  cry out, without understanding what you said.  I tried to open
Title:  the door, but it was locked inside; then I called the sergeant."
Title:  
Title:  "And here I am," said the sergeant.
Title:  
Title:  Felton, quite bewildered, almost mad, stood speechless.
Title:  
Title:  Milady plainly perceived that it was now her turn to take part in
Title:  the scene.  She ran to the table, and seizing the knife which
Title:  Felton had laid down, exclaimed, "And by what right will you
Title:  prevent me from dying?"
Title:  
Title:  "Great God!" exclaimed Felton, on seeing the knife glitter in her
Title:  hand.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment a burst of ironical laughter resounded through the
Title:  corridor.  The baron, attracted by the noise, in his chamber
Title:  gown, his sword under his arm, stood in the doorway.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said he, "here we are, at the last act of the tragedy.  You
Title:  see, Felton, the drama has gone through all the phases I named;
Title:  but be easy, no blood will flow."
Title:  
Title:  Milady perceived that all was lost unless she gave Felton an
Title:  immediate and terrible proof of her courage.
Title:  
Title:  "You are mistaken, my Lord, blood will flow; and may that blood
Title:  fall back on those who cause it to flow!"
Title:  
Title:  Felton uttered a cry, and rushed toward her.  He was too late;
Title:  Milady had stabbed herself.
Title:  
Title:  But the knife had fortunately, we ought to say skillfully, come
Title:  in contact with the steel busk, which at that period, like a
Title:  cuirass, defended the chests of women.  It had glided down it,
Title:  tearing the robe, and had penetrated slantingly between the flesh
Title:  and the ribs.  Milady's robe was not the less stained with blood
Title:  in a second.
Title:  
Title:  Milady fell down, and seemed to be in a swoon.
Title:  
Title:  Felton snatched away the knife.
Title:  
Title:  "See, my Lord," said he, in a deep, gloomy tone, "here is a woman
Title:  who was under my guard, and who has killed herself!"
Title:  
Title:  "Be at ease, Felton," said Lord de Winter.  "She is not dead;
Title:  demons do not die so easily.  Be tranquil, and go wait for me in
Title:  my chamber."
Title:  
Title:  "But, my Lord--"
Title:  
Title:  "Go, sir, I command you!"
Title:  
Title:  At this injunction from his superior, Felton obeyed; but in going
Title:  out, he put the knife into his bosom.
Title:  
Title:  As to Lord de Winter, he contented himself with calling the woman
Title:  who waited on Milady, and when she was come, he recommended the
Title:  prisoner, who was still fainting, to her care, and left them
Title:  alone.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, all things considered and notwithstanding his
Title:  suspicions, as the wound might be serious, he immediately sent
Title:  off a mounted man to find a physician.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  58  ESCAPE
Title:  
Title:  As Lord de Winter had thought, Milady's wound was not dangerous.
Title:  So soon as she was left alone with the woman whom the baron had
Title:  summoned to her assistance she opened her eyes.
Title:  
Title:  It was, however, necessary to affect weakness and pain--not a
Title:  very difficult task for so finished an actress as Milady.  Thus
Title:  the poor woman was completely the dupe of the prisoner, whom,
Title:  notwithstanding her hints, she persisted in watching all night.
Title:  
Title:  But the presence of this woman did not prevent Milady from
Title:  thinking.
Title:  
Title:  There was no longer a doubt that Felton was convinced; Felton was
Title:  hers.  If an angel appeared to that young man as an accuser of
Title:  Milady, he would take him, in the mental disposition in which he
Title:  now found himself, for a messenger sent by the devil.
Title:  
Title:  Milady smiled at this thought, for Felton was now her only hope--
Title:  her only means of safety.
Title:  
Title:  But Lord de Winter might suspect him; Felton himself might now be
Title:  watched!
Title:  
Title:  Toward four o'clock in the morning the doctor arrived; but since
Title:  the time Milady stabbed herself, however short, the wound had
Title:  closed.  The doctor could therefore measure neither the direction
Title:  nor the depth of it; he only satisfied himself by Milady's pulse
Title:  that the case was not serious.
Title:  
Title:  In the morning Milady, under the pretext that she had not slept
Title:  well in the night and wanted rest, sent away the woman who
Title:  attended her.
Title:  
Title:  She had one hope, which was that Felton would appear at the
Title:  breakfast hour; but Felton did not come.
Title:  
Title:  Were her fears realized?  Was Felton, suspected by the baron,
Title:  about to fail her at the decisive moment?  She had only one day
Title:  left.  Lord de Winter had announced her embarkation for the
Title:  twenty-third, and it was now the morning of the twenty-second.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless she still waited patiently till the hour for dinner.
Title:  
Title:  Although she had eaten nothing in the morning, the dinner was
Title:  brought in at its usual time.  Milady then perceived, with
Title:  terror, that the uniform of the soldiers who guarded her was
Title:  changed.
Title:  
Title:  Then she ventured to ask what had become of Felton.
Title:  
Title:  She was told that he had left the castle an hour before on
Title:  horseback.  She inquired if the baron was still at the castle.
Title:  The soldier replied that he was, and that he had given orders to
Title:  be informed if the prisoner wished to speak to him.
Title:  
Title:  Milady replied that she was too weak at present, and that her
Title:  only desire was to be left alone.
Title:  
Title:  The soldier went out, leaving the dinner served.
Title:  
Title:  Felton was sent away.  The marines were removed.  Felton was then
Title:  mistrusted.
Title:  
Title:  This was the last blow to the prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  Left alone, she arose.  The bed, which she had kept from prudence
Title:  and that they might believe her seriously wounded, burned her
Title:  like a bed of fire.  She cast a glance at the door; the baron had
Title:  had a plank nailed over the grating.  He no doubt feared that by
Title:  this opening she might still by some diabolical means corrupt her
Title:  guards.
Title:  
Title:  Milady smiled with joy.  She was free now to give way to her
Title:  transports without being observed.  She traversed her chamber
Title:  with the excitement of a furious maniac or of a tigress shut up
Title:  in an iron cage.  CERTES, if the knife had been left in her
Title:  power, she would now have thought, not of killing herself, but of
Title:  killing the baron.
Title:  
Title:  At six o'clock Lord de Winter came in.  He was armed at all
Title:  points.  This man, in whom Milady till that time had only seen a
Title:  very simple gentleman, had become an admirable jailer.  He
Title:  appeared to foresee all, to divine all, to anticipate all.
Title:  
Title:  A single look at Milady apprised him of all that was passing in
Title:  her mind.
Title:  
Title:  "Ay!" said he, "I see; but you shall not kill me today.  You
Title:  have no longer a weapon; and besides, I am on my guard.  You had
Title:  begun to pervert my poor Felton.  He was yielding to your
Title:  infernal influence; but I will save him.  He will never see you
Title:  again; all is over.  Get your clothes together.  Tomorrow you
Title:  will go.  I had fixed the embarkation for the twenty-fourth; but
Title:  I have reflected that the more promptly the affair takes place
Title:  the more sure it will be.  Tomorrow, by twelve o'clock, I shall
Title:  have the order for your exile, signed, BUCKINGHAM.  If you
Title:  speak a single word to anyone before going aboard ship, my
Title:  sergeant will blow your brains out.  He has orders to do so.  If
Title:  when on the ship you speak a single word to anyone before the
Title:  captain permits you, the captain will have you thrown into the
Title:  sea.  That is agreed upon.
Title:  
Title:  "AU REVOIR; then; that is all I have to say today.  Tomorrow I
Title:  will see you again, to take my leave."  With these words the
Title:  baron went out.  Milady had listened to all this menacing tirade
Title:  with a smile of disdain on her lips, but rage in her heart.
Title:  
Title:  Supper was served.  Milady felt that she stood in need of all her
Title:  strength.  She did not know what might take place during this
Title:  night which approached so menacingly--for large masses of cloud
Title:  rolled over the face of the sky, and distant lightning announced
Title:  a storm.
Title:  
Title:  The storm broke about ten o'clock.  Milady felt a consolation in
Title:  seeing nature partake of the disorder of her heart.  The thunder
Title:  growled in the air like the passion and anger in her thoughts.
Title:  It appeared to her that the blast as it swept along disheveled
Title:  her brow, as it bowed the branches of the trees and bore away
Title:  their leaves.  She howled as the hurricane howled; and her voice
Title:  was lost in the great voice of nature, which also seemed to groan
Title:  with despair.
Title:  
Title:  All at once she heard a tap at her window, and by the help of a
Title:  flash of lightning she saw the face of a man appear behind the
Title:  bars.
Title:  
Title:  She ran to the window and opened it.
Title:  
Title:  "Felton!" cried she.  "I am saved."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Felton; "but silence, silence!  I must have time to
Title:  file through these bars.  Only take care that I am not seen
Title:  through the wicket."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, it is a proof that the Lord is on our side, Felton," replied
Title:  Milady.  "They have closed up the grating with a board."
Title:  
Title:  "That is well; God has made them senseless," said Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "But what must I do?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing, nothing, only shut the window.  Go to bed, or at least
Title:  lie down in your clothes.  As soon as I have done I will knock on
Title:  one of the panes of glass.  But will you be able to follow me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes!"
Title:  
Title:  "Your wound?"
Title:  
Title:  "Gives me pain, but will not prevent my walking."
Title:  
Title:  "Be ready, then, at the first signal."
Title:  
Title:  Milady shut the window, extinguished the lamp, and went, as
Title:  Felton had desired her, to lie down on the bed.  Amid the moaning
Title:  of the storm she heard the grinding of the file upon the bars,
Title:  and by the light of every flash she perceived the shadow of
Title:  Felton through the panes.
Title:  
Title:  She passed an hour without breathing, panting, with a cold sweat
Title:  upon her brow, and her heart oppressed by frightful agony at
Title:  every movement she heard in the corridor.
Title:  
Title:  There are hours which last a year.
Title:  
Title:  At the expiration of an hour, Felton tapped again.
Title:  
Title:  Milady sprang out of bed and opened the window.  Two bars removed
Title:  formed an opening for a man to pass through.
Title:  
Title:  "Are you ready?" asked Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes.  Must I take anything with me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Money, if you have any."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; fortunately they have left me all I had."
Title:  
Title:  "So much the better, for I have expended all mine in chartering a
Title:  vessel."
Title:  
Title:  "Here!" said Milady, placing a bag full of louis in Felton's
Title:  hands.
Title:  
Title:  Felton took the bag and threw it to the foot of the wall.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said he, "will you come?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am ready."
Title:  
Title:  Milady mounted upon a chair and passed the upper part of her body
Title:  through the window.  She saw the young officer suspended over the
Title:  abyss by a ladder of ropes.  For the first time an emotion of
Title:  terror reminded her that she was a woman.
Title:  
Title:  The dark space frightened her.
Title:  
Title:  "I expected this," said Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "It's nothing, it's nothing!" said Milady.  "I will descend with
Title:  my eyes shut."
Title:  
Title:  "Have you confidence in me?" said Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "You ask that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Put your two hands together.  Cross them; that's right!"
Title:  
Title:  Felton tied her two wrists together with his handkerchief, and
Title:  then with a cord over the handkerchief.
Title:  
Title:  "What are you doing?" asked Milady, with surprise.
Title:  
Title:  "Pass your arms around my neck, and fear nothing."
Title:  
Title:  "But I shall make you lose your balance, and we shall both be
Title:  dashed to pieces."
Title:  
Title:  "Don't be afraid.  I am a sailor."
Title:  
Title:  Not a second was to be lost.  Milady passed her two arms round
Title:  Felton's neck, and let herself slip out of the window.  Felton
Title:  began to descend the ladder slowly, step by step.  Despite the
Title:  weight of two bodies, the blast of the hurricane shook them in
Title:  the air.
Title:  
Title:  All at once Felton stopped.
Title:  
Title:  "What is the matter?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence," said Felton, "I hear footsteps."
Title:  
Title:  "We are discovered!"
Title:  
Title:  There was a silence of several seconds.
Title:  
Title:  "No," said Felton, "it is nothing."
Title:  
Title:  "But what, then, is the noise?"
Title:  
Title:  "That of the patrol going their rounds."
Title:  
Title:  "Where is their road?"
Title:  
Title:  "Just under us."
Title:  
Title:  "They will discover us!"
Title:  
Title:  "No, if it does not lighten."
Title:  
Title:  "But they will run against the bottom of the ladder."
Title:  
Title:  "Fortunately it is too short by six feet."
Title:  
Title:  "Here they are!  My God!"
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!"
Title:  
Title:  Both remained suspended, motionless and breathless, within twenty
Title:  paces of the ground, while the patrol passed beneath them
Title:  laughing and talking.  This was a terrible moment for the
Title:  fugitives.
Title:  
Title:  The patrol passed.  The noise of their retreating footsteps and
Title:  the murmur of their voices soon died away.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said Felton, "we are safe."
Title:  
Title:  Milady breathed a deep sigh and fainted.
Title:  
Title:  Felton continued to descend.  Near the bottom of the ladder, when
Title:  he found no more support for his feet, he clung with his hands;
Title:  at length, arrived at the last step, he let himself hang by the
Title:  strength of his wrists, and touched the ground.  He stooped down,
Title:  picked up the bag of money, and placed it between his teeth.
Title:  Then he took Milady in his arms, and set off briskly in the
Title:  direction opposite to that which the patrol had taken.  He soon
Title:  left the pathway of the patrol, descended across the rocks, and
Title:  when arrived on the edge of the sea, whistled.
Title:  
Title:  A similar signal replied to him; and five minutes after, a boat
Title:  appeared, rowed by four men.
Title:  
Title:  The boat approached as near as it could to the shore; but there
Title:  was not depth enough of water for it to touch land.  Felton
Title:  walked into the sea up to his middle, being unwilling to trust
Title:  his precious burden to anybody.
Title:  
Title:  Fortunately the storm began to subside, but still the sea was
Title:  disturbed.  The little boat bounded over the waves like a nut-
Title:  shell.
Title:  
Title:  "To the sloop," said Felton, "and row quickly."
Title:  
Title:  The four men bent to their oars, but the sea was too high to let
Title:  them get much hold of it.
Title:  
Title:  However, they left the castle behind; that was the principal
Title:  thing.  The night was extremely dark.  It was almost impossible
Title:  to see the shore from the boat; they would therefore be less
Title:  likely to see the boat from the shore.
Title:  
Title:  A black point floated on the sea.  That was the sloop.  While the
Title:  boat was advancing with all the speed its four rowers could give
Title:  it, Felton untied the cord and then the handkerchief which bound
Title:  Milady's hands together.  When her hands were loosed he took some
Title:  sea water and sprinkled it over her face.
Title:  
Title:  Milady breathed a sigh, and opened her eyes.
Title:  
Title:  "Where am I?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Saved!" replied the young officer.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, saved, saved!" cried she.  "Yes, there is the sky; here is
Title:  the sea!  The air I breathe is the air of liberty!  Ah, thanks,
Title:  Felton, thanks!"
Title:  
Title:  The young man pressed her to his heart.
Title:  
Title:  "But what is the matter with my hands!" asked Milady; "it seems
Title:  as if my wrists had been crushed in a vice."
Title:  
Title:  Milady held out her arms; her wrists were bruised.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas!" said Felton, looking at those beautiful hands, and
Title:  shaking his head sorrowfully.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, it's nothing, nothing!" cried Milady.  "I remember now."
Title:  
Title:  Milady looked around her, as if in search of something.
Title:  
Title:  "It is there," said Felton, touching the bag of money with his
Title:  foot.
Title:  
Title:  They drew near to the sloop.  A sailor on watch hailed the boat;
Title:  the boat replied.
Title:  
Title:  "What vessel is that?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "The one I have hired for you."
Title:  
Title:  "Where will it take me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Where you please, after you have put me on shore at Portsmouth."
Title:  
Title:  "What are you going to do at Portsmouth?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Accomplish the orders of Lord de Winter," said Felton, with a
Title:  gloomy smile.
Title:  
Title:  "What orders?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "You do not understand?" asked Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "No; explain yourself, I beg."
Title:  
Title:  "As he mistrusted me, he determined to guard you himself, and
Title:  sent me in his place to get Buckingham to sign the order for your
Title:  transportation."
Title:  
Title:  "But if he mistrusted you, how could he confide such an order to
Title:  you?"
Title:  
Title:  "How could I know what I was the bearer of?"
Title:  
Title:  "That's true!  And you are going to Portsmouth?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have no time to lose.  Tomorrow is the twenty-third, and
Title:  Buckingham sets sail tomorrow with his fleet."
Title:  
Title:  "He sets sail tomorrow!  Where for?"
Title:  
Title:  "For La Rochelle."
Title:  
Title:  "He need not sail!" cried Milady, forgetting her usual presence
Title:  of mind.
Title:  
Title:  "Be satisfied," replied Felton; "he will not sail."
Title:  
Title:  Milady started with joy.  She could read to the depths of the
Title:  heart of this young man; the death of Buckingham was written
Title:  there at full length.
Title:  
Title:  "Felton," cried she, "you are as great as Judas Maccabeus!  If
Title:  you die, I will die with you; that is all I can say to you."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!" cried Felton; "we are here."
Title:  
Title:  In fact, they touched the sloop.
Title:  
Title:  Felton mounted the ladder first, and gave his hand to Milady,
Title:  while the sailors supported her, for the sea was still much
Title:  agitated.
Title:  
Title:  An instant after they were on the deck.
Title:  
Title:  "Captain," said Felton, "this is person of whom I spoke to you,
Title:  and whom you must convey safe and sound to France."
Title:  
Title:  "For a thousand pistoles," said the captain.
Title:  
Title:  "I have paid you five hundred of them."
Title:  
Title:  "That's correct," said the captain.
Title:  
Title:  "And here are the other five hundred," replied Milady, placing
Title:  her hand upon the bag of gold.
Title:  
Title:  "No," said the captain, "I make but one bargain; and I have
Title:  agreed with this young man that the other five hundred shall not
Title:  be due to me till we arrive at Boulogne."
Title:  
Title:  "And shall we arrive there?"
Title:  
Title:  "Safe and sound, as true as my name's Jack Butler."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Milady, "if you keep your word, instead of five
Title:  hundred, I will give you a thousand pistoles."
Title:  
Title:  "Hurrah for you, then, my beautiful lady," cried the captain;
Title:  "and may God often send me such passengers as your Ladyship!"
Title:  
Title:  "Meanwhile," said Felton, "convey me to the little bay of--; you
Title:  know it was agreed you should put in there."
Title:  
Title:  The captain replied by ordering the necessary maneuvers, and
Title:  toward seven o'clock in the morning the little vessel cast anchor
Title:  in the bay that had been named.
Title:  
Title:  During this passage, Felton related everything to Milady--how,
Title:  instead of going to London, he had chartered the little vessel;
Title:  how he had returned; how he had scaled the wall by fastening
Title:  cramps in the interstices of the stones, as he ascended, to give
Title:  him foothold; and how, when he had reached the bars, he fastened
Title:  his ladder.  Milady knew the rest.
Title:  
Title:  On her side, Milady tried to encourage Felton in his project; but
Title:  at the first words which issued from her mouth, she plainly saw
Title:  that the young fanatic stood more in need of being moderated than
Title:  urged.
Title:  
Title:  It was agreed that Milady should wait for Felton till ten
Title:  o'clock; if he did not return by ten o'clock she was to sail.
Title:  
Title:  In that case, and supposing he was at liberty, he was to rejoin
Title:  her in France, at the convent of the Carmelites at Bethune.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  59  WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH AUGUST 23, 1628
Title:  
Title:  Felton took leave of Milady as a brother about to go for a mere walk
Title:  takes leave of his sister, kissing her hand.
Title:  
Title:  His whole body appeared in its ordinary state of calmness, only an
Title:  unusual fire beamed from his eyes, like the effects of a fever; his brow
Title:  was more pale than it generally was; his teeth were clenched, and his
Title:  speech had a short dry accent which indicated that something dark was at
Title:  work within him.
Title:  
Title:  As long as he remained in the boat which conveyed him to land, he kept
Title:  his face toward Milady, who, standing on the deck, followed him with her
Title:  eyes.  Both were free from the fear of pursuit; nobody ever came into
Title:  Milady's apartment before nine o'clock, and it would require three hours
Title:  to go from the castle to London.
Title:  
Title:  Felton jumped onshore, climbed the little ascent which led to the top of
Title:  the cliff, saluted Milady a last time, and took his course toward the
Title:  city.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of a hundred paces, the ground began to decline, and he could
Title:  only see the mast of the sloop.
Title:  
Title:  He immediately ran in the direction of Portsmouth, which he saw at
Title:  nearly half a league before him, standing out in the haze of the
Title:  morning, with its houses and towers.
Title:  
Title:  Beyond Portsmouth the sea was covered with vessels whose masts, like a
Title:  forest of poplars despoiled by the winter, bent with each breath of the
Title:  wind.
Title:  
Title:  Felton, in his rapid walk, reviewed in his mind all the accusations
Title:  against the favorite of James I and Charles I, furnished by two years of
Title:  premature meditation and a long sojourn among the Puritans.
Title:  
Title:  When he compared the public crimes of this minister--startling crimes,
Title:  European crimes, if so we may say--with the private and unknown crimes
Title:  with which Milady had charged him, Felton found that the more culpable
Title:  of the two men which formed the character of Buckingham was the one of
Title:  whom the public knew not the life.  This was because his love, so
Title:  strange, so new, and so ardent, made him view the infamous and imaginary
Title:  accusations of Milady de Winter as, through a magnifying glass, one
Title:  views as frightful monsters atoms in reality imperceptible by the side
Title:  of an ant.
Title:  
Title:  The rapidity of his walk heated his blood still more; the idea that he
Title:  left behind him, exposed to a frightful vengeance, the woman he loved,
Title:  or rather whom he adored as a saint, the emotion he had experienced,
Title:  present fatigue--all together exalted his mind above human feeling.
Title:  
Title:  He entered Portsmouth about eight o'clock in the morning.  The whole
Title:  population was on foot; drums were beating in the streets and in the
Title:  port; the troops about to embark were marching toward the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Felton arrived at the palace of the Admiralty, covered with dust, and
Title:  streaming with perspiration.  His countenance, usually so pale, was
Title:  purple with heat and passion.  The sentinel wanted to repulse him; but
Title:  Felton called to the officer of the post, and drawing from his pocket
Title:  the letter of which he was the bearer, he said, "A pressing message from
Title:  Lord de Winter."
Title:  
Title:  At the name of Lord de Winter, who was known to be one of his Grace's
Title:  most intimate friends, the officer of the post gave orders to let Felton
Title:  pass, who, besides, wore the uniform of a naval officer.
Title:  
Title:  Felton darted into the palace.
Title:  
Title:  At the moment he entered the vestibule, another man was entering
Title:  likewise, dusty, out of breath, leaving at the gate a post horse, which,
Title:  on reaching the palace, tumbled on his foreknees.
Title:  
Title:  Felton and he addressed Patrick, the duke's confidential lackey, at the
Title:  same moment.  Felton named Lord de Winter; the unknown would not name
Title:  anybody, and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would make
Title:  himself known.  Each was anxious to gain admission before the other.
Title:  
Title:  Patrick, who knew Lord de Winter was in affairs of the service, and in
Title:  relations of friendship with the duke, gave the preference to the one
Title:  who came in his name.  The other was forced to wait, and it was easily
Title:  to be seen how he cursed the delay.
Title:  
Title:  The valet led Felton through a large hall in which waited the deputies
Title:  from La Rochelle, headed by the Prince de Soubise, and introduced him
Title:  into a closet where Buckingham, just out of the bath, was finishing his
Title:  toilet, upon which, as at all times, he bestowed extraordinary
Title:  attention.
Title:  
Title:  "Lieutenant Felton, from Lord de Winter," said Patrick.
Title:  
Title:  "From Lord de Winter!" repeated Buckingham; "let him come in."
Title:  
Title:  Felton entered.  At that moment Buckingham was throwing upon a couch a
Title:  rich toilet robe, worked with gold, in order to put on a blue velvet
Title:  doublet embroidered with pearls.
Title:  
Title:  "Why didn't the baron come himself?" demanded Buckingham.  "I expected
Title:  him this morning."
Title:  
Title:  "He desired me to tell your Grace," replied Felton, "that he very much
Title:  regretted not having that honor, but that he was prevented by the guard
Title:  he is obliged to keep at the castle."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I know that," said Buckingham; "he has a prisoner."
Title:  
Title:  "It is of that prisoner that I wish to speak to your Grace," replied
Title:  Felton.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, speak!"
Title:  
Title:  "That which I have to say of her can only be heard by yourself, my
Title:  Lord!"
Title:  
Title:  "Leave us, Patrick," said Buckingham; "but remain within sound of the
Title:  bell.  I shall call you presently."
Title:  
Title:  Patrick went out.
Title:  
Title:  "We are alone, sir," said Buckingham; "speak!"
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord," said Felton, "the Baron de Winter wrote to you the other day
Title:  to request you to sign an order of embarkation relative to a young woman
Title:  named Charlotte Backson."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sir; and I answered him, to bring or send me that order and I
Title:  would sign it."
Title:  
Title:  "Here it is, my Lord."
Title:  
Title:  "Give it to me," said the duke.
Title:  
Title:  And taking it from Felton, he cast a rapid glance over the paper, and
Title:  perceiving that it was the one that had been mentioned to him, he placed
Title:  it on the table, took a pen, and prepared to sign it.
Title:  
Title:  "Pardon, my Lord," said Felton, stopping the duke; "but does your Grace
Title:  know that the name of Charlotte Backson is not the true name of this
Title:  young woman?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, sir, I know it," replied the duke, dipping the quill in the ink.
Title:  
Title:  "Then your Grace knows her real name?" asked Felton, in a sharp tone.
Title:  
Title:  "I know it"; and the duke put the quill to the paper.  Felton grew pale.
Title:  
Title:  "And knowing that real name, my Lord," replied Felton, "will you sign it
Title:  all the same?"
Title:  
Title:  "Doubtless," said Buckingham, "and rather twice than once."
Title:  
Title:  "I cannot believe," continued Felton, in a voice that became more sharp
Title:  and rough, "that your Grace knows that it is to Milady de Winter this
Title:  relates."
Title:  
Title:  "I know it perfectly, although I am astonished that you know it."
Title:  
Title:  "And will your Grace sign that order without remorse?"
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham looked at the young man haughtily.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know, sir, that you are asking me very strange questions, and
Title:  that I am very foolish to answer them?"
Title:  
Title:  "Reply to them, my Lord," said Felton; "the circumstances are more
Title:  serious than you perhaps believe."
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham reflected that the young man, coming from Lord de Winter,
Title:  undoubtedly spoke in his name, and softened.
Title:  
Title:  "Without remorse," said he.  "The baron knows, as well as myself, that
Title:  Milady de Winter is a very guilty woman, and it is treating her very
Title:  favorably to commute her punishment to transportation."
Title:  The duke put his pen to the paper.
Title:  
Title:  "You will not sign that order, my Lord!" said Felton, making a step
Title:  toward the duke.
Title:  
Title:  "I will not sign this order!  And why not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to the
Title:  lady."
Title:  
Title:  "I should do her justice by sending her to Tyburn," said Buckingham.
Title:  "This lady is infamous."
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, Milady de Winter is an angel; you know that she is, and I
Title:  demand her liberty of you."
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!  Are you mad, to talk to me thus?" said Buckingham.
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, excuse me!  I speak as I can; I restrain myself.  But, my
Title:  Lord, think of what you're about to do, and beware of going too far!"
Title:  
Title:  "What do you say?  God pardon me!" cried Buckingham, "I really think he
Title:  threatens me!"
Title:  
Title:  "No, my Lord, I still plead.  And I say to you:  one drop of water
Title:  suffices to make the full vase overflow; one slight fault may draw down
Title:  punishment upon the head spared, despite many crimes."
Title:  
Title:  "Mr. Felton," said Buckingham, "you will withdraw, and place yourself at
Title:  once under arrest."
Title:  
Title:  "You will hear me to the end, my Lord.  You have seduced this young
Title:  girl; you have outraged, defiled her.  Repair your crimes toward her;
Title:  let her go free, and I will exact nothing else from you."
Title:  
Title:  "You will exact!" said Buckingham, looking at Felton with astonishment,
Title:  and dwelling upon each syllable of the three words as he pronounced
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord," continued Felton, becoming more excited as he spoke, "my
Title:  Lord, beware!  All England is tired of your iniquities; my Lord, you
Title:  have abused the royal power, which you have almost usurped; my Lord, you
Title:  are held in horror by God and men.  God will punish you hereafter, but I
Title:  will punish you here!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, this is too much!" cried Buckingham, making a step toward the door.
Title:  
Title:  Felton barred his passage.
Title:  
Title:  "I ask it humbly of you, my Lord," said he; "sign the order for the
Title:  liberation of Milady de Winter.  Remember that she is a woman whom you
Title:  have dishonored."
Title:  
Title:  "Withdraw, sir," said Buckingham, "or I will call my attendant, and have
Title:  you placed in irons."
Title:  
Title:  "You shall not call," said Felton, throwing himself between the duke and
Title:  the bell placed on a stand encrusted with silver.  "Beware, my Lord, you
Title:  are in the hands of God!"
Title:  
Title:  "In the hands of the devil, you mean!" cried Buckingham, raising his
Title:  voice so as to attract the notice of his people, without absolutely
Title:  shouting.
Title:  
Title:  "Sign, my Lord; sign the liberation of Milady de Winter," said Felton,
Title:  holding out a paper to the duke.
Title:  
Title:  "By force? You are joking!  Holloa, Patrick!"
Title:  
Title:  "Sign, my Lord!"
Title:  
Title:  "Never."
Title:  
Title:  "Never?"
Title:  
Title:  "Help!" shouted the duke; and at the same time he sprang toward his
Title:  sword.
Title:  
Title:  But Felton did not give him time to draw it.  He held the knife with
Title:  which Milady had stabbed herself, open in his bosom; at one bound he was
Title:  upon the duke.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment Patrick entered the room, crying, "A letter from France,
Title:  my Lord."
Title:  
Title:  "From France!" cried Buckingham, forgetting everything in thinking from
Title:  whom that letter came.
Title:  
Title:  Felton took advantage of this moment, and plunged the knife into his
Title:  side up to the handle.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, traitor," cried Buckingham, "you have killed me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Murder!" screamed Patrick.
Title:  
Title:  Felton cast his eyes round for means of escape, and seeing the door
Title:  free, he rushed into the next chamber, in which, as we have said, the
Title:  deputies from La Rochelle were waiting, crossed it as quickly as
Title:  possible, and rushed toward the staircase; but upon the first step he
Title:  met Lord de Winter, who, seeing him pale, confused, livid, and stained
Title:  with blood both on his hands and face, seized him by the throat, crying,
Title:  "I knew it!  I guessed it!  But too late by a minute, unfortunate,
Title:  unfortunate that I am!"
Title:  
Title:  Felton made no resistance.  Lord de Winter placed him in the hands of
Title:  the guards, who led him, while awaiting further orders, to a little
Title:  terrace commanding the sea; and then the baron hastened to the duke's
Title:  chamber.
Title:  
Title:  At the cry uttered by the duke and the scream of Patrick, the man whom
Title:  Felton had met in the antechamber rushed into the chamber.
Title:  
Title:  He found the duke reclining upon a sofa, with his hand pressed upon the
Title:  wound.
Title:  
Title:  "Laporte," said the duke, in a dying voice, "Laporte, do you come from
Title:  her?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur," replied the faithful cloak bearer of Anne of
Title:  Austria, "but too late, perhaps."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, Laporte, you may be overheard.  Patrick, let no one enter.
Title:  Oh, I cannot tell what she says to me!  My God, I am dying!"
Title:  
Title:  And the duke swooned.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, Lord de Winter, the deputies, the leaders of the expedition,
Title:  the officers of Buckingham's household, had all made their way into the
Title:  chamber.  Cries of despair resounded on all sides.  The news, which
Title:  filled the palace with tears and groans, soon became known, and spread
Title:  itself throughout the city.
Title:  
Title:  The report of a cannon announced that something new and unexpected had
Title:  taken place.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter tore his hair.
Title:  
Title:  "Too late by a minute!" cried he, "too late by a minute!  Oh, my God, my
Title:  God!  what a misfortune!"
Title:  
Title:  He had been informed at seven o'clock in the morning that a rope ladder
Title:  floated from one of the windows of the castle; he had hastened to
Title:  Milady's chamber, had found it empty, the window open, and the bars
Title:  filed, had remembered the verbal caution d'Artagnan had transmitted to
Title:  him by his messenger, had trembled for the duke, and running to the
Title:  stable without taking time to have a horse saddled, had jumped upon the
Title:  first he found, had galloped off like the wind, had alighted below in
Title:  the courtyard, had ascended the stairs precipitately, and on the top
Title:  step, as we have said, had encountered Felton.
Title:  
Title:  The duke, however, was not dead.  He recovered a little, reopened his
Title:  eyes, and hope revived in all hearts.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said he, "leave me alone with Patrick and Laporte--ah, is
Title:  that you, de Winter?  You sent me a strange madman this morning!  See
Title:  the state in which he has put me."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my Lord!" cried the baron, "I shall never console myself."
Title:  
Title:  "And you would be quite wrong, my dear de Winter," said Buckingham,
Title:  holding out his hand to him.  "I do not know the man who deserves being
Title:  regretted during the whole life of another man; but leave us, I pray
Title:  you."
Title:  
Title:  The baron went out sobbing.
Title:  
Title:  There only remained in the closet of the wounded duke Laporte and
Title:  Patrick.  A physician was sought for, but none was yet found.
Title:  
Title:  "You will live, my Lord, you will live!" repeated the faithful servant
Title:  of Anne of Austria, on his knees before the duke's sofa.
Title:  
Title:  "What has she written to me?" said Buckingham, feebly, streaming with
Title:  blood, and suppressing his agony to speak of her he loved, "what has she
Title:  written to me?  Read me her letter."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my Lord!" said Laporte.
Title:  
Title:  "Obey, Laporte, do you not see I have no time to lose?"
Title:  
Title:  Laporte broke the seal, and placed the paper before the eyes of the
Title:  duke; but Buckingham in vain tried to make out the writing.
Title:  
Title:  "Read!" said he, "read!  I cannot see.  Read, then!  For soon, perhaps,
Title:  I shall not hear, and I shall die without knowing what she has written
Title:  to me."
Title:  
Title:  Laporte made no further objection, and read:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord, By that which, since I have known you, have suffered by you
Title:  and for you, I conjure you, if you have any care for my repose, to
Title:  countermand those great armaments which you are preparing against
Title:  France, to put an end to a war of which it is publicly said religion is
Title:  the ostensible cause, and of which, it is generally whispered, your love
Title:  for me is the concealed cause.  This war may not only bring great
Title:  catastrophes upon England and France, but misfortune upon you, my Lord,
Title:  for which I should never console myself.
Title:  
Title:  "Be careful of your life, which is menaced, and which will be dear to me
Title:  from the moment I am not obliged to see an enemy in you.
Title:  
Title:  "Your affectionate
Title:  
Title:  "ANNE"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham collected all his remaining strength to listen to the reading
Title:  of the letter; then, when it was ended, as if he had met with a bitter
Title:  disappointment, he asked, "Have you nothing else to say to me by the
Title:  living voice, Laporte?"
Title:  
Title:  "The queen charged me to tell you to watch over yourself, for she had
Title:  advice that your assassination would be attempted."
Title:  
Title:  "And is that all--is that all?" replied Buckingham, impatiently.
Title:  
Title:  "She likewise charged me to tell you that she still loved you."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said Buckingham, "God be praised!  My death, then, will not be to
Title:  her as the death of a stranger!"
Title:  
Title:  Laporte burst into tears.
Title:  
Title:  "Patrick," said the due, "bring me the casket in which the diamond studs
Title:  were kept."
Title:  
Title:  Patrick brought the object desired, which Laporte recognized as having
Title:  belonged to the queen.
Title:  
Title:  "Now the scent bag of white satin, on which her cipher is embroidered in
Title:  pearls."
Title:  
Title:  Patrick again obeyed.
Title:  
Title:  "Here, Laporte," said Buckingham, "these are the only tokens I ever
Title:  received from her--this silver casket and these two letters.  You will
Title:  restore them to her Majesty; and as a last memorial"--he looked round
Title:  for some valuable object--"you will add--"
Title:  
Title:  He still sought; but his eyes, darkened by death, encountered only the
Title:  knife which had fallen from the hand of Felton, still smoking with the
Title:  blood spread over its blade.
Title:  
Title:  "And you will add to them this knife," said the duke, pressing the hand
Title:  of Laporte.  He had just strength enough to place the scent bag at the
Title:  bottom of the silver casket, and to let the knife fall into it, making a
Title:  sign to Laporte that he was no longer able to speak; than, in a last
Title:  convulsion, which this time he had not the power to combat, he slipped
Title:  from the sofa to the floor.
Title:  
Title:  Patrick uttered a loud cry.
Title:  
Title:  Buckingham tried to smile a last time; but death checked his thought,
Title:  which remained engraved on his brow like a last kiss of love.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment the duke's surgeon arrived, quite terrified; he was
Title:  already on board the admiral's ship, where they had been obliged to seek
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  He approached the duke, took his hand, held it for an instant in his
Title:  own, and letting it fall, "All is useless," said he, "he is dead."
Title:  
Title:  "Dead, dead!" cried Patrick.
Title:  
Title:  At this cry all the crowd re-entered the apartment, and throughout the
Title:  palace and town there was nothing but consternation and tumult.
Title:  
Title:  As soon as Lord de Winter saw Buckingham was dead, he ran to Felton,
Title:  whom the soldiers still guarded on the terrace of the palace.
Title:  
Title:  "Wretch!" said he to the young man, who since the death of Buckingham
Title:  had regained that coolness and self-possession which never after
Title:  abandoned him, "wretch!  what have you done?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have avenged myself!" said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Avenged yourself," said the baron.  "Rather say that you have served as
Title:  an instrument to that accursed woman; but I swear to you that this crime
Title:  shall be her last."
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know what you mean," replied Felton, quietly, "and I am
Title:  ignorant of whom you are speaking, my Lord.  I killed the Duke of
Title:  Buckingham because he twice refused you yourself to appoint me captain;
Title:  I have punished him for his injustice, that is all."
Title:  
Title:  De Winter, stupefied, looked on while the soldiers bound Felton, and
Title:  could not tell what to think of such insensibility.
Title:  
Title:  One thing alone, however, threw a shade over the pallid brow of Felton.
Title:  At every noise he heard, the simple Puritan fancied he recognized the
Title:  step and voice of Milady coming to throw herself into his arms, to
Title:  accuse herself, and die with him.
Title:  
Title:  All at once he started.  His eyes became fixed upon a point of the sea,
Title:  commanded by the terrace where he was.  With the eagle glance of a
Title:  sailor he had recognized there, where another would have seen only a
Title:  gull hovering over the waves, the sail of a sloop which was directed
Title:  toward the cost of France.
Title:  
Title:  He grew deadly pale, placed his hand upon his heart, which was breaking,
Title:  and at once perceived all the treachery.
Title:  
Title:  "One last favor, my Lord!" said he to the baron.
Title:  
Title:  "What?" asked his Lordship.
Title:  
Title:  "What o'clock is it?"
Title:  
Title:  The baron drew out his watch.  "It wants ten minutes to nine," said he.
Title:  
Title:  Milady had hastened her departure by an hour and a half.  As soon as she
Title:  heard the cannon which announced the fatal event, she had ordered the
Title:  anchor to be weighed.  The vessel was making way under a blue sky, at
Title:  great distance from the coast.
Title:  
Title:  "God has so willed it!" said he, with the resignation of a fanatic; but
Title:  without, however, being able to take his eyes from that ship, on board
Title:  of which he doubtless fancied he could distinguish the white outline of
Title:  her to whom he had sacrificed his life.
Title:  
Title:  De Winter followed his look, observed his feelings, and guessed all.
Title:  
Title:  "Be punished ALONE, for the first, miserable man!" said Lord de Winter
Title:  to Felton, who was being dragged away with his eyes turned toward the
Title:  sea; "but I swear to you by the memory of my brother whom I have loved
Title:  so much that your accomplice is not saved."
Title:  
Title:  Felton lowered his head without pronouncing a syllable.
Title:  
Title:  As to Lord de Winter, he descended the stairs rapidly, and went straight
Title:  to the port.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  60  IN FRANCE
Title:  
Title:  The first fear of the King of England, Charles I, on learning of the
Title:  death of the duke, was that such terrible news might discourage the
Title:  Rochellais; he tried, says Richelieu in his Memoirs, to conceal it from
Title:  them as long as possible, closing all the ports of his kingdom, and
Title:  carefully keeping watch that no vessel should sail until the army which
Title:  Buckingham was getting together had gone, taking upon himself, in
Title:  default of Buckingham, to superintend the departure.
Title:  
Title:  He carried the strictness of this order so far as to detain in England
Title:  the ambassadors of Denmark, who had taken their leave, and the regular
Title:  ambassador of Holland, who was to take back to the port of Flushing the
Title:  Indian merchantmen of which Charles I had made restitution to the United
Title:  Provinces.
Title:  
Title:  But as he did not think of giving this order till five hours after the
Title:  event--that is to say, till two o'clock in the afternoon--two vessels
Title:  had already left the port, the one bearing, as we know, Milady, who,
Title:  already anticipating the event, was further confirmed in that belief by
Title:  seeing the black flag flying at the masthead of the admiral's ship.
Title:  
Title:  As to the second vessel, we will tell hereafter whom it carried, and how
Title:  it set sail.
Title:  
Title:  During this time nothing new occurred in the camp at La Rochelle; only
Title:  the king, who was bored, as always, but perhaps a little more so in camp
Title:  than elsewhere, resolved to go incognito and spend the festival of St.
Title:  Louis at St. Germain, and asked the cardinal to order him an escort of
Title:  only twenty Musketeers.  The cardinal, who sometimes became weary of the
Title:  king, granted this leave of absence with great pleasure to his royal
Title:  lieutenant, who promised to return about the fifteenth of September.
Title:  
Title:  M. de Treville, being informed of this by his Eminence, packed his
Title:  portmanteau; and as without knowing the cause he knew the great desire
Title:  and even imperative need which his friends had of returning to Paris, it
Title:  goes without saying that he fixed upon them to form part of the escort.
Title:  
Title:  The four young men heard the news a quarter of an hour after M. de
Title:  Treville, for they were the first to whom he communicated it.  It was
Title:  then that d'Artagnan appreciated the favor the cardinal had conferred
Title:  upon him in making him at last enter the Musketeers--for without that
Title:  circumstance he would have been forced to remain in the camp while his
Title:  companions left it.
Title:  
Title:  It goes without saying that this impatience to return toward Paris had
Title:  for a cause the danger which Mme. Bonacieux would run of meeting at the
Title:  convent of Bethune with Milady, her mortal enemy.  Aramis therefore had
Title:  written immediately to Marie Michon, the seamstress at Tours who had
Title:  such fine acquaintances, to obtain from the queen authority for Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux to leave the convent, and to retire either into Lorraine or
Title:  Belgium.  They had not long to wait for an answer.  Eight or ten days
Title:  afterward Aramis received the following letter:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  My Dear Cousin, Here is the authorization from my sister to withdraw
Title:  our little servant from the convent of Bethune, the air of which you
Title:  think is bad for her.  My sister sends you this authorization with great
Title:  pleasure, for she is very partial to the little girl, to whom she
Title:  intends to be more serviceable hereafter.
Title:  
Title:  I salute you,
Title:  
Title:  MARIE MICHON
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  To this letter was added an order, conceived in these terms:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  At the Louvre, August 10, 1628
Title:  The superior of the convent of Bethune will place in the hands of the
Title:  person who shall present this note to her the novice who entered the
Title:  convent upon my recommendation and under my patronage.
Title:  
Title:  ANNE
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It may be easily imagined how the relationship between Aramis and a
Title:  seamstress who called the queen her sister amused the young men; but
Title:  Aramis, after having blushed two or three times up to the whites of his
Title:  eyes at the gross pleasantry of Porthos, begged his friends not to
Title:  revert to the subject again, declaring that if a single word more was
Title:  said to him about it, he would never again implore his cousins to
Title:  interfere in such affairs.
Title:  
Title:  There was no further question, therefore, about Marie Michon among the
Title:  four Musketeers, who besides had what they wanted:  that was, the order
Title:  to withdraw Mme. Bonacieux from the convent of the Carmelites of
Title:  Bethune.  It was true that this order would not be of great use to them
Title:  while they were in camp at La Rochelle; that is to say, at the other end
Title:  of France.  Therefore d'Artagnan was going to ask leave of absence of M.
Title:  de Treville, confiding to him candidly the importance of his departure,
Title:  when the news was transmitted to him as well as to his three friends
Title:  that the king was about to set out for Paris with an escort of twenty
Title:  Musketeers, and that they formed part of the escort.
Title:  
Title:  Their joy was great.  The lackeys were sent on before with the baggage,
Title:  and they set out on the morning of the sixteenth.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal accompanied his Majesty from Surgeres to Mauzes; and there
Title:  the king and his minister took leave of each other with great
Title:  demonstrations of friendship.
Title:  
Title:  The king, however, who sought distraction, while traveling as fast as
Title:  possible--for he was anxious to be in Paris by the twenty-third--stopped
Title:  from time to time to fly the magpie, a pastime for which the taste had
Title:  been formerly inspired in him by de Luynes, and for which he had always
Title:  preserved a great predilection.  Out of the twenty Musketeers sixteen,
Title:  when this took place, rejoiced greatly at this relaxation; but the other
Title:  four cursed it heartily.  D'Artagnan, in particular, had a perpetual
Title:  buzzing in his ears, which Porthos explained thus:  "A very great lady
Title:  has told me that this means that somebody is talking of you somewhere."
Title:  
Title:  At length the escort passed through Paris on the twenty-third, in the
Title:  night.  The king thanked M. de Treville, and permitted him to distribute
Title:  furloughs for four days, on condition that the favored parties should
Title:  not appear in any public place, under penalty of the Bastille.
Title:  
Title:  The first four furloughs granted, as may be imagined, were to our four
Title:  friends.  Still further, Athos obtained of M. de Treville six days
Title:  instead of four, and introduced into these six days two more nights--for
Title:  they set out on the twenty-fourth at five o'clock in the evening, and as
Title:  a further kindness M. de Treville post-dated the leave to the morning of
Title:  the twenty-fifth.
Title:  
Title:  "Good Lord!" said d'Artagnan, who, as we have often said, never stumbled
Title:  at anything.  "It appears to me that we are making a great trouble of a
Title:  very simple thing.  In two days, and by using up two or three horses
Title:  (that's nothing; I have plenty of money), I am at Bethune.  I present my
Title:  letter from the queen to the superior, and I bring back the dear
Title:  treasure I go to seek--not into Lorraine, not into Belgium, but to
Title:  Paris, where she will be much better concealed, particularly while the
Title:  cardinal is at La Rochelle.  Well, once returned from the country, half
Title:  by the protection of her cousin, half through what we have personally
Title:  done for her, we shall obtain from the queen what we desire.  Remain,
Title:  then, where you are, and do not exhaust yourselves with useless fatigue.
Title:  Myself and Planchet are all that such a simple expedition requires."
Title:  
Title:  To this Athos replied quietly:  "We also have money left--for I have not
Title:  yet drunk all my share of the diamond, and Porthos and Aramis have not
Title:  eaten all theirs.  We can therefore use up four horses as well as one.
Title:  But consider, d'Artagnan," added he, in a tone so solemn that it made
Title:  the young man shudder, "consider that Bethune is a city where the
Title:  cardinal has given rendezvous to a woman who, wherever she goes, brings
Title:  misery with her.  If you had only to deal with four men, d'Artagnan, I
Title:  would allow you to go alone.  You have to do with that woman!  We four
Title:  will go; and I hope to God that with our four lackeys we may be in
Title:  sufficient number."
Title:  
Title:  "You terrify me, Athos!"  cried d'Artagnan.  "My God!  what do you
Title:  fear?"
Title:  
Title:  "Everything!" replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan examined the countenances of his companions, which, like that
Title:  of Athos, wore an impression of deep anxiety; and they continued their
Title:  route as fast as their horses could carry them, but without adding
Title:  another word.
Title:  
Title:  On the evening of the twenty-fifth, as they were entering Arras, and as
Title:  d'Artagnan was dismounting at the inn of the Golden Harrow to drink a
Title:  glass of wine, a horseman came out of the post yard, where he had just
Title:  had a relay, started off at a gallop, and with a fresh horse took the
Title:  road to Paris.  At the moment he passed through the gateway into the
Title:  street, the wind blew open the cloak in which he was wrapped, although
Title:  it was in the month of August, and lifted his hat, which the traveler
Title:  seized with his hand the moment it had left his head, pulling it eagerly
Title:  over his eyes.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, who had his eyes fixed upon this man, became very pale, and
Title:  let his glass fall.
Title:  
Title:  "What is the matter, monsieur?"  said Planchet.  "Oh, come, gentlemen,
Title:  my master is ill!"
Title:  
Title:  The three friends hastened toward d'Artagnan, who, instead of being ill,
Title:  ran toward his horse.  They stopped him at the door.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, where the devil are you going now?"  cried Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "It is he!"  cried d'Artagnan, pale with anger, and with the sweat on his
Title:  brow, "it is he!  let me overtake him!"
Title:  
Title:  "He?  What he?"  asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "He, that man!"
Title:  
Title:  "What man?"
Title:  
Title:  "That cursed man, my evil genius, whom I have always met with when
Title:  threatened by some misfortune, he who accompanied that horrible woman
Title:  when I met her for the first time, he whom I was seeking when I offended
Title:  our Athos, he whom I saw on the very morning Madame Bonacieux was
Title:  abducted.  I have seen him; that is he!  I recognized him when the wind
Title:  blew upon his cloak."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!"  said Athos, musingly.
Title:  
Title:  "To saddle, gentlemen!  to saddle!  Let us pursue him, and we shall
Title:  overtake him!"
Title:  
Title:  "My dear friend," said Aramis, "remember that he goes in an opposite
Title:  direction from that in which we are going, that he has a fresh horse, and
Title:  ours are fatigued, so that we shall disable our own horses without even
Title:  a chance of overtaking him.  Let the man go, d'Artagnan; let us save the
Title:  woman."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur, monsieur!"  cried a hostler, running out and looking after
Title:  the stranger, "monsieur, here is a paper which dropped out of your hat!
Title:  Eh, monsieur, eh!"
Title:  
Title:  "Friend," said d'Artagnan, "a half-pistole for that paper!"
Title:  
Title:  "My faith, monsieur, with great pleasure!  Here it is!"
Title:  
Title:  The hostler, enchanted with the good day's work he had done, returned to
Title:  the yard.  D'Artagnan unfolded the paper.
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"  eagerly demanded all his three friends.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing but one word!"  said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Aramis, "but that one word is the name of some town or
Title:  village."
Title:  
Title:  "Armentieres,"  read Porthos; "Armentieres?  I don't know such a
Title:  place."
Title:  
Title:  "And that name of a town or village is written in her hand!" cried
Title:  Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Come on, come on!"  said d'Artagnan; "let us keep that paper carefully,
Title:  perhaps I have not thrown away my half-pistole.  To horse, my friends,
Title:  to horse!"
Title:  
Title:  And the four friends flew at a gallop along the road to Bethune.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  61  THE CARMELITE CONVENT AT BETHUNE
Title:  
Title:  Great criminals bear about them a kind of predestination which makes them
Title:  surmount all obstacles, which makes them escape all dangers, up to the
Title:  moment which a wearied Providence has marked as the rock of their
Title:  impious fortunes.
Title:  
Title:  It was thus with Milady.  She escaped the cruisers of both nations, and
Title:  arrived at Boulogne without accident.
Title:  
Title:  When landing at Portsmouth, Milady was an Englishwoman whom the
Title:  persecutions of the French drove from La Rochelle; when landing at
Title:  Boulogne, after a two days' passage, she passed for a Frenchwoman whom
Title:  the English persecuted at Portsmouth out of their hatred for France.
Title:  
Title:  Milady had, likewise, the best of passports--her beauty, her noble
Title:  appearance, and the liberality with which she distributed her pistoles.
Title:  Freed from the usual formalities by the affable smile and gallant
Title:  manners of an old governor of the port, who kissed her hand, she only
Title:  remained long enough at Boulogne to put into the post a letter,
Title:  conceived in the following terms:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "To his Eminence Monseigneur the Cardinal Richelieu, in his camp before
Title:  La Rochelle.
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur, Let your Eminence be reassured.  His Grace the Duke of
Title:  Buckingham WILL NOT SET OUT for France.
Title:  
Title:  "MILADY DE ----
Title:  
Title:  "BOULOGNE, evening of the twenty-fifth.
Title:  
Title:  "P.S.--According to the desire of your Eminence, I report to the convent
Title:  of the Carmelites at Bethune, where I will await your orders."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Accordingly, that same evening Milady commenced her journey.  Night
Title:  overtook her; she stopped, and slept at an inn.  At five o'clock the
Title:  next morning she again proceeded, and in three hours after entered
Title:  Bethune.  She inquired for the convent of the Carmelites, and went
Title:  thither immediately.
Title:  
Title:  The superior met her; Milady showed her the cardinal's order.  The
Title:  abbess assigned her a chamber, and had breakfast served.
Title:  
Title:  All the past was effaced from the eyes of this woman; and her looks,
Title:  fixed on the future, beheld nothing but the high fortunes reserved for
Title:  her by the cardinal, whom she had so successfully served without his
Title:  name being in any way mixed up with the sanguinary affair.  The ever-new
Title:  passions which consumed her gave to her life the appearance of those
Title:  clouds which float in the heavens, reflecting sometimes azure, sometimes
Title:  fire, sometimes the opaque blackness of the tempest, and which leave no
Title:  traces upon the earth behind them but devastation and death.
Title:  
Title:  After breakfast, the abbess came to pay her a visit.  There is very
Title:  little amusement in the cloister, and the good superior was eager to
Title:  make the acquaintance of her new boarder.
Title:  
Title:  Milady wished to please the abbess.  This was a very easy matter for a
Title:  woman so really superior as she was.  She tried to be agreeable, and she
Title:  was charming, winning the good superior by her varied conversation and
Title:  by the graces of her whole personality.
Title:  
Title:  The abbess, who was the daughter of a noble house, took particular
Title:  delight in stories of the court, which so seldom travel to the
Title:  extremities of the kingdom, and which, above all, have so much
Title:  difficulty in penetrating the walls of convents, at whose threshold the
Title:  noise of the world dies away.
Title:  
Title:  Milady, on the contrary, was quite conversant with all aristocratic
Title:  intrigues, amid which she had constantly lived for five or six years.
Title:  She made it her business, therefore, to amuse the good abbess with the
Title:  worldly practices of the court of France, mixed with the eccentric
Title:  pursuits of the king; she made for her the scandalous chronicle of the
Title:  lords and ladies of the court, whom the abbess knew perfectly by name,
Title:  touched lightly on the amours of the queen and the Duke of Buckingham,
Title:  talking a great deal to induce her auditor to talk a little.
Title:  
Title:  But the abbess contented herself with listening and smiling without
Title:  replying a word.  Milady, however, saw that this sort of narrative
Title:  amused her very much, and kept at it; only she now let her conversation
Title:  drift toward the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  But she was greatly embarrassed.  She did not know whether the abbess
Title:  was a royalist or a cardinalist; she therefore confined herself to a
Title:  prudent middle course.  But the abbess, on her part, maintained a
Title:  reserve still more prudent, contenting herself with making a profound
Title:  inclination of the head every time the fair traveler pronounced the name
Title:  of his Eminence.
Title:  
Title:  Milady began to think she should soon grow weary of a convent life; she
Title:  resolved, then, to risk something in order that she might know how to
Title:  act afterward.  Desirous of seeing how far the discretion of the good
Title:  abbess would go, she began to tell a story, obscure at first, but very
Title:  circumstantial afterward, about the cardinal, relating the amours of the
Title:  minister with Mme. d'Aiguillon, Marion de Lorme, and several other gay
Title:  women.
Title:  
Title:  The abbess listened more attentively, grew animated by degrees, and
Title:  smiled.
Title:  
Title:  "Good," thought Milady; "she takes a pleasure in my conversation.  If
Title:  she is a cardinalist, she has no fanaticism, at least."
Title:  
Title:  She then went on to describe the persecutions exercised by the cardinal
Title:  upon his enemies.  The abbess only crossed herself, without approving or
Title:  disapproving.
Title:  
Title:  This confirmed Milady in her opinion that the abbess was rather royalist
Title:  than cardinalist.  Milady therefore continued, coloring her narrations
Title:  more and more.
Title:  
Title:  "I am very ignorant of these matters," said the abbess, at length; "but
Title:  however distant from the court we may be, however remote from the
Title:  interests of the world we may be placed, we have very sad examples of
Title:  what you have related.  And one of our boarders has suffered much from
Title:  the vengeance and persecution of the cardinal!"
Title:  
Title:  "One of your boarders?" said Milady; "oh, my God!  Poor woman!  I pity
Title:  her, then."
Title:  
Title:  "And you have reason, for she is much to be pitied.  Imprisonment,
Title:  menaces, ill treatment-she has suffered everything.  But after all,"
Title:  resumed the abbess, "Monsieur Cardinal has perhaps plausible motives for
Title:  acting thus; and though she has the look of an angel, we must not always
Title:  judge people by the appearance."
Title:  
Title:  "Good!" said Milady to herself; "who knows!  I am about, perhaps, to
Title:  discover something here; I am in the vein."
Title:  
Title:  She tried to give her countenance an appearance of perfect candor.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas," said Milady, "I know it is so.  It is said that we must not
Title:  trust to the face; but in what, then, shall we place confidence, if not
Title:  in the most beautiful work of the Lord?  As for me, I shall be deceived
Title:  all my life perhaps, but I shall always have faith in a person whose
Title:  countenance inspires me with sympathy."
Title:  
Title:  "You would, then, be tempted to believe," said the abbess, "that this
Title:  young person is innocent?"
Title:  
Title:  "The cardinal pursues not only crimes," said she:  "there are certain
Title:  virtues which he pursues more severely than certain offenses."
Title:  
Title:  "Permit me, madame, to express my surprise," said the abbess.
Title:  
Title:  "At what?" said Milady, with the utmost ingenuousness.
Title:  
Title:  "At the language you use."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you find so astonishing in that language?" said Milady,
Title:  smiling.
Title:  
Title:  "You are the friend of the cardinal, for he sends you hither, and yet--"
Title:  
Title:  "And yet I speak ill of him," replied Milady, finishing the thought of
Title:  the superior.
Title:  
Title:  "At least you don't speak well of him."
Title:  
Title:  "That is because I am not his friend," said she, sighing, "but his
Title:  victim!"
Title:  
Title:  "But this letter in which he recommends you to me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Is an order for me to confine myself to a sort of prison, from which he
Title:  will release me by one of his satellites."
Title:  
Title:  "But why have you not fled?"
Title:  
Title:  "Whither should I go?  Do you believe there is a spot on the earth which
Title:  the cardinal cannot reach if he takes the trouble to stretch forth his
Title:  hand?  If I were a man, that would barely be possible; but what can a
Title:  woman do?  This young boarder of yours, has she tried to fly?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, that is true; but she--that is another thing; I believe she is
Title:  detained in France by some love affair."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said Milady, with a sigh, "if she loves she is not altogether
Title:  wretched."
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said the abbess, looking at Milady with increasing interest, "I
Title:  behold another poor victim?"
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, yes," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  The abbess looked at her for an instant with uneasiness, as if a fresh
Title:  thought suggested itself to her mind.
Title:  
Title:  "You are not an enemy of our holy faith?" said she, hesitatingly.
Title:  
Title:  "Who--I?"  cried Milady; "I a Protestant?  Oh, no!  I call to witness
Title:  the God who hears us, that on the contrary I am a fervent Catholic!"
Title:  
Title:  "Then, madame," said the abbess, smiling, "be reassured; the house in
Title:  which you are shall not be a very hard prison, and we will do all in our
Title:  power to make you cherish your captivity.  You will find here, moreover,
Title:  the young woman of whom I spoke, who is persecuted, no doubt, in
Title:  consequence of some court intrigue.  She is amiable and well-behaved."
Title:  
Title:  "What is her name?"
Title:  
Title:  "She was sent to me by someone of high rank, under the name of Kitty.  I
Title:  have not tried to discover her other name."
Title:  
Title:  "Kitty!"  cried Milady.  "What?  Are you sure?"
Title:  
Title:  "That she is called so?  Yes, madame.  Do you know her?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady smiled to herself at the idea which had occurred to her that this
Title:  might be her old chambermaid.  There was connected with the remembrance
Title:  of this girl a remembrance of anger; and a desire of vengeance
Title:  disordered the features of Milady, which, however, immediately recovered
Title:  the calm and benevolent expression which this woman of a hundred faces
Title:  had for a moment allowed them to lose.
Title:  
Title:  "And when can I see this young lady, for whom I already feel so great a
Title:  sympathy?"  asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, this evening," said the abbess; "today even.  But you have been
Title:  traveling these four days, as you told me yourself.  This morning you
Title:  rose at five o'clock; you must stand in need of repose.  Go to bed and
Title:  sleep; at dinnertime we will rouse you."
Title:  
Title:  Although Milady would very willingly have gone without sleep, sustained
Title:  as she was by all the excitements which a new adventure awakened in her
Title:  heart, ever thirsting for intrigues, she nevertheless accepted the offer
Title:  of the superior.  During the last fifteen days she had experienced so
Title:  many and such various emotions that if her frame of iron was still
Title:  capable of supporting fatigue, her mind required repose.
Title:  
Title:  She therefore took leave of the abbess, and went to bed, softly rocked
Title:  by the ideas of vengeance which the name of Kitty had naturally brought
Title:  to her thoughts.  She remembered that almost unlimited promise which the
Title:  cardinal had given her if she succeeded in her enterprise.  She had
Title:  succeeded; d'Artagnan was then in her power!
Title:  
Title:  One thing alone frightened her; that was the remembrance of her husband,
Title:  the Comte de la Fere, whom she had believed dead, or at least
Title:  expatriated, and whom she found again in Athos-the best friend of
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  But alas, if he was the friend of d'Artagnan, he must have lent him his
Title:  assistance in all the proceedings by whose aid the queen had defeated
Title:  the project of his Eminence; if he was the friend of d'Artagnan, he was
Title:  the enemy of the cardinal; and she doubtless would succeed in involving
Title:  him in the vengeance by which she hoped to destroy the young Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  All these hopes were so many sweet thoughts for Milady; so, rocked by
Title:  them, she soon fell asleep.
Title:  
Title:  She was awakened by a soft voice which sounded at the foot of her bed.
Title:  She opened her eyes, and saw the abbess, accompanied by a young woman
Title:  with light hair and delicate complexion, who fixed upon her a look full
Title:  of benevolent curiosity.
Title:  
Title:  The face of the young woman was entirely unknown to her.  Each examined
Title:  the other with great attention, while exchanging the customary
Title:  compliments; both were very handsome, but of quite different styles of
Title:  beauty.  Milady, however, smiled in observing that she excelled the
Title:  young woman by far in her high air and aristocratic bearing.  It is true
Title:  that the habit of a novice, which the young woman wore, was not very
Title:  advantageous in a contest of this kind.
Title:  
Title:  The abbess introduced them to each other.  When this formality was
Title:  ended, as her duties called her to chapel, she left the two young women
Title:  alone.
Title:  
Title:  The novice, seeing Milady in bed, was about to follow the example of
Title:  the superior; but Milady stopped her.
Title:  
Title:  "How, madame," said she, "I have scarcely seen you, and you already
Title:  wish to deprive me of your company, upon which I had counted a little, I
Title:  must confess, for the time I have to pass here?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, madame," replied the novice, "only I thought I had chosen my time
Title:  ill; you were asleep, you are fatigued."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Milady, "what can those who sleep wish for--a happy
Title:  awakening?  This awakening you have given me; allow me, then, to enjoy
Title:  it at my ease," and taking her hand, she drew her toward the armchair by
Title:  the bedside.
Title:  
Title:  The novice sat down.
Title:  
Title:  "How unfortunate I am!" said she; "I have been here six months without
Title:  the shadow of recreation.  You arrive, and your presence was likely to
Title:  afford me delightful company; yet I expect, in all probability, to quit
Title:  the convent at any moment."
Title:  
Title:  "How, you are going soon?"  asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "At least I hope so," said the novice, with an expression of joy which
Title:  she made no effort to disguise.
Title:  
Title:  "I think I learned you had suffered persecutions from the cardinal,"
Title:  continued Milady; "that would have been another motive for sympathy
Title:  between us."
Title:  
Title:  "What I have heard, then, from our good mother is true; you have
Title:  likewise been a victim of that wicked priest."
Title:  
Title:  "Hush!"  said Milady; "let us not, even here, speak thus of him.  All my
Title:  misfortunes arise from my having said nearly what you have said before a
Title:  woman whom I thought my friend, and who betrayed me.  Are you also the
Title:  victim of a treachery?"
Title:  
Title:  "No," said the novice, "but of my devotion--of a devotion to a woman I
Title:  loved, for whom I would have laid down my life, for whom I would give it
Title:  still."
Title:  
Title:  "And who has abandoned you--is that it?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have been sufficiently unjust to believe so; but during the last two
Title:  or three days I have obtained proof to the contrary, for which I thank
Title:  God--for it would have cost me very dear to think she had forgotten me.
Title:  But you, madame, you appear to be free," continued the novice; "and if
Title:  you were inclined to fly it only rests with yourself to do so."
Title:  
Title:  "Whither would you have me go, without friends, without money, in a part
Title:  of France with which I am unacquainted, and where I have never been
Title:  before?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh," cried the novice, "as to friends, you would have them wherever you
Title:  want, you appear so good and are so beautiful!"
Title:  
Title:  "That does not prevent," replied Milady, softening her smile so as to
Title:  give it an angelic expression, "my being alone or being persecuted."
Title:  
Title:  "Hear me," said the novice; "we must trust in heaven.  There always
Title:  comes a moment when the good you have done pleads your cause before God;
Title:  and see, perhaps it is a happiness for you, humble and powerless as I
Title:  am, that you have met with me, for if I leave this place, well-I have
Title:  powerful friends, who, after having exerted themselves on my account,
Title:  may also exert themselves for you."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, when I said I was alone," said Milady, hoping to make the novice
Title:  talk by talking of herself, "it is not for want of friends in high
Title:  places; but these friends themselves tremble before the cardinal.  The
Title:  queen herself does not dare to oppose the terrible minister.  I have
Title:  proof that her Majesty, notwithstanding her excellent heart, has more
Title:  than once been obliged to abandon to the anger of his Eminence persons
Title:  who had served her."
Title:  
Title:  "Trust me, madame; the queen may appear to have abandoned those persons,
Title:  but we must not put faith in appearances.  The more they are persecuted,
Title:  the more she thinks of them; and often, when they least expect it, they
Title:  have proof of a kind remembrance."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas!"  said Milady, "I believe so; the queen is so good!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you know her, then, that lovely and noble queen, that you speak of
Title:  her thus!" cried the novice, with enthusiasm.
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say," replied Milady, driven into her entrenchment, "that I
Title:  have not the honor of knowing her personally; but I know a great number
Title:  of her most intimate friends.  I am acquainted with Monsieur de Putange;
Title:  I met Monsieur Dujart in England; I know Monsieur de Treville."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur de Treville!"  exclaimed the novice, "do you know Monsieur de
Title:  Treville?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, perfectly well--intimately even."
Title:  
Title:  "The captain of the king's Musketeers?"
Title:  
Title:  "The captain of the king's Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, then, only see!"  cried the novice; "we shall soon be well
Title:  acquainted, almost friends.  If you know Monsieur de Treville, you must
Title:  have visited him?"
Title:  
Title:  "Often!"  said Milady, who, having entered this track, and perceiving
Title:  that falsehood succeeded, was determined to follow it to the end.
Title:  
Title:  "With him, then, you must have seen some of his Musketeers?"
Title:  
Title:  "All those he is in the habit of receiving!"  replied Milady, for whom
Title:  this conversation began to have a real interest.
Title:  
Title:  "Name a few of those whom you know, and you will see if they are my
Title:  friends."
Title:  
Title:  "Well!"  said Milady, embarrassed, "I know Monsieur de Louvigny,
Title:  Monsieur de Courtivron, Monsieur de Ferussac."
Title:  
Title:  The novice let her speak, then seeing that she paused, she said, "Don't
Title:  you know a gentleman named Athos?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady became as pale as the sheets in which she was lying, and mistress
Title:  as she was of herself, could not help uttering a cry, seizing the hand
Title:  of the novice, and devouring her with looks.
Title:  
Title:  "What is the matter?  Good God!"  asked the poor woman, "have I said
Title:  anything that has wounded you?"
Title:  
Title:  "No; but the name struck me, because I also have known that gentleman,
Title:  and it appeared strange to me to meet with a person who appears to know
Title:  him well."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, very well; not only him, but some of his friends, Messieurs
Title:  Porthos and Aramis!"
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!  you know them likewise?  I know them," cried Milady, who began
Title:  to feel a chill penetrate her heart.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, if you know them, you know that they are good and free
Title:  companions.  Why do you not apply to them, if you stand in need of
Title:  help?"
Title:  
Title:  "That is to say," stammered Milady, "I am not really very intimate with
Title:  any of them.  I know them from having heard one of their friends,
Title:  Monsieur d'Artagnan, say a great deal about them."
Title:  
Title:  "You know Monsieur d'Artagnan!" cried the novice, in her turn seizing
Title:  the hands of Milady and devouring her with her eyes.
Title:  
Title:  Then remarking the strange expression of Milady's countenance, she said,
Title:  "Pardon me, madame; you know him by what title?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why," replied Milady, embarrassed, "why, by the title of friend."
Title:  
Title:  "You deceive me, madame," said the novice; "you have been his mistress!"
Title:  
Title:  "It is you who have been his mistress, madame!"  cried Milady, in her
Title:  turn.
Title:  
Title:  "I?"  said the novice.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, you!  I know you now.  You are Madame Bonacieux!"
Title:  
Title:  The young woman drew back, filled with surprise and terror.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, do not deny it!  Answer!" continued Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, yes, madame," said the novice, "Are we rivals?"
Title:  
Title:  The countenance of Milady was illumined by so savage a joy that under
Title:  any other circumstances Mme. Bonacieux would have fled in terror; but
Title:  she was absorbed by jealousy.
Title:  
Title:  "Speak, madame!"  resumed Mme. Bonacieux, with an energy of which she
Title:  might not have been believed capable.  "Have you been, or are you, his
Title:  mistress?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no!"  cried Milady, with an accent that admitted no doubt of her
Title:  truth.  "Never, never!"
Title:  
Title:  "I believe you," said Mme. Bonacieux; "but why, then, did you cry out
Title:  so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you not understand?" said Milady, who had already overcome her
Title:  agitation and recovered all her presence of mind.
Title:  
Title:  "How can I understand?  I know nothing."
Title:  
Title:  "Can you not understand that Monsieur d'Artagnan, being my friend, might
Title:  take me into his confidence?"
Title:  
Title:  "Truly?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you not perceive that I know all--your abduction from the little
Title:  house at St. Germain, his despair, that of his friends, and their
Title:  useless inquiries up to this moment?  How could I help being astonished
Title:  when, without having the least expectation of such a thing, I meet you
Title:  face to face--you, of whom we have so often spoken together, you whom he
Title:  loves with all his soul, you whom he had taught me to love before I had
Title:  seen you!  Ah, dear Constance, I have found you, then; I see you at
Title:  last!"
Title:  
Title:  And Milady stretched out her arms to Mme. Bonacieux, who, convinced by
Title:  what she had just said, saw nothing in this woman whom an instant before
Title:  she had believed her rival but a sincere and devoted friend.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, pardon me, pardon me!"  cried she, sinking upon the shoulders of
Title:  Milady.  "Pardon me, I love him so much!"
Title:  
Title:  These two women held each other for an instant in a close embrace.
Title:  Certainly, if Milady's strength had been equal to her hatred, Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux would never have left that embrace alive.  But not being able
Title:  to stifle her, she smiled upon her.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, you beautiful, good little creature!"  said Milady.  "How delighted
Title:  I am to have found you!  Let me look at you!"  and while saying these
Title:  words, she absolutely devoured her by her looks.  "Oh, yes it is you
Title:  indeed!  From what he has told me, I know you now.  I recognize you
Title:  perfectly."
Title:  
Title:  The poor young woman could not possibly suspect what frightful cruelty
Title:  was behind the rampart of that pure brow, behind those brilliant eyes in
Title:  which she read nothing but interest and compassion.
Title:  
Title:  "Then you know what I have suffered," said Mme. Bonacieux, "since he
Title:  has told you what he has suffered; but to suffer for him is happiness."
Title:  
Title:  Milady replied mechanically, "Yes, that is happiness."  She was thinking
Title:  of something else.
Title:  
Title:  "And then," continued Mme. Bonacieux, "my punishment is drawing to a
Title:  close.  Tomorrow, this evening, perhaps, I shall see him again; and then
Title:  the past will no longer exist."
Title:  
Title:  "This evening?"  asked Milady, roused from her reverie by these words.
Title:  "What do you mean?  Do you expect news from him?"
Title:  
Title:  "I expect himself."
Title:  
Title:  "Himself?  D'Artagnan here?"
Title:  
Title:  "Himself!"
Title:  
Title:  "But that's impossible!  He is at the siege of La Rochelle with the
Title:  cardinal.  He will not return till after the taking of the city."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you fancy so!  But is there anything impossible for my d'Artagnan,
Title:  the noble and loyal gentleman?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I cannot believe you!"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, read, then!" said the unhappy young woman, in the excess of her
Title:  pride and joy, presenting a letter to Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "The writing of Madame de Chevreuse!"  said Milady to herself.  "Ah, I
Title:  always thought there was some secret understanding in that quarter!"
Title:  And she greedily read the following few lines:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  My Dear Child, Hold yourself ready.  OUR FRIEND will see you soon,
Title:  and he will only see you to release you from that imprisonment in which
Title:  your safety required you should be concealed.  Prepare, then, for your
Title:  departure, and never despair of us.
Title:  
Title:  Our charming Gascon has just proved himself as brave and faithful as
Title:  ever.  Tell him that certain parties are grateful for the warning he has
Title:  given.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes," said Milady; "the letter is precise.  Do you know what that
Title:  warning was?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, I only suspect he has warned the queen against some fresh
Title:  machinations of the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, that's it, no doubt!" said Milady, returning the letter to Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux, and letting her head sink pensively upon her bosom.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment they heard the gallop of a horse.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux, darting to the window, "can it be he?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady remained still in bed, petrified by surprise; so many unexpected
Title:  things happened to her all at once that for the first time she was at a
Title:  loss.
Title:  
Title:  "He, he!"  murmured she; "can it be he?"  And she remained in bed with
Title:  her eyes fixed.
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, no!"  said Mme. Bonacieux; "it is a man I don't know, although he
Title:  seems to be coming here.  Yes, he checks his pace; he stops at the gate;
Title:  he rings."
Title:  
Title:  Milady sprang out of bed.
Title:  
Title:  "You are sure it is not he?"  said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, very sure!"
Title:  
Title:  "Perhaps you did not see well."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, if I were to see the plume of his hat, the end of his cloak, I
Title:  should know HIM!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady was dressing herself all the time.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, he has entered."
Title:  
Title:  "It is for you or me!"
Title:  
Title:  "My God, how agitated you seem!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I admit it.  I have not your confidence; I fear the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Hush!"  said Mme. Bonacieux; "somebody is coming."
Title:  
Title:  Immediately the door opened, and the superior entered.
Title:  
Title:  "Did you come from Boulogne?"  demanded she of Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," replied she, trying to recover her self-possession. "Who wants
Title:  me?"
Title:  
Title:  "A man who will not tell his name, but who comes from the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "And who wishes to speak with me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Who wishes to speak to a lady recently come from Boulogne."
Title:  
Title:  "Then let him come in, if you please."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux.  "Can it be bad news?"
Title:  
Title:  "I fear it."
Title:  
Title:  "I will leave you with this stranger; but as soon as he is gone, if you
Title:  will permit me, I will return."
Title:  
Title:  "PERMIT you?  I BESEECH you."
Title:  
Title:  The superior and Mme. Bonacieux retired.
Title:  
Title:  Milady remained alone, with her eyes fixed upon the door.  An instant
Title:  later, the jingling of spurs was heard upon the stairs, steps drew near,
Title:  the door opened, and a man appeared.
Title:  
Title:  Milady uttered a cry of joy; this man was the Comte de Rochefort--the
Title:  demoniacal tool of his Eminence.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  62  TWO VARIETIES OF DEMONS
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," cried Milady and Rochefort together, "it is you!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, it is I."
Title:  
Title:  "And you come?" asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "From La Rochelle; and you?"
Title:  
Title:  "From England."
Title:  
Title:  "Buckingham?"
Title:  
Title:  "Dead or desperately wounded, as I left without having been able to hear
Title:  anything of him.  A fanatic has just assassinated him."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said Rochefort, with a smile; "this is a fortunate chance--one
Title:  that will delight his Eminence!  Have you informed him of it?"
Title:  
Title:  "I wrote to him from Boulogne.  But what brings you here?"
Title:  
Title:  "His Eminence was uneasy, and sent me to find you."
Title:  
Title:  "I only arrived yesterday."
Title:  
Title:  "And what have you been doing since yesterday?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have not lost my time."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I don't doubt that."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know whom I have encountered here?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "Guess."
Title:  
Title:  "How can I?"
Title:  
Title:  "That young woman whom the queen took out of prison."
Title:  
Title:  "The mistress of that fellow d'Artagnan?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; Madame Bonacieux, with whose retreat the cardinal was
Title:  unacquainted."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, well," said Rochefort, "here is a chance which may pair off with
Title:  the other!  Monsieur Cardinal is indeed a privileged man!"
Title:  
Title:  "Imagine my astonishment," continued Milady, "when I found myself face
Title:  to face with this woman!"
Title:  
Title:  "Does she know you?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "Then she looks upon you as a stranger?"
Title:  
Title:  Milady smiled.  "I am her best friend."
Title:  
Title:  "Upon my honor," said Rochefort, "it takes you, my dear countess, to
Title:  perform such miracles!"
Title:  
Title:  "And it is well I can, Chevalier," said Milady, "for do you know what is
Title:  going on here?"
Title:  
Title:  "No."
Title:  
Title:  "They will come for her tomorrow or the day after, with an order from
Title:  the queen."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!  And who?"
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan and his friends."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed, they will go so far that we shall be obliged to send them to
Title:  the Bastille."
Title:  
Title:  "Why is it not done already?"
Title:  
Title:  "What would you?  The cardinal has a weakness for these men which I
Title:  cannot comprehend."
Title:  
Title:  "Indeed!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, tell him this, Rochefort.  Tell him that our conversation
Title:  at the inn of the Red Dovecot was overheard by these four men; tell him
Title:  that after his departure one of them came up to me and took from me by
Title:  violence the safe-conduct which he had given me; tell him they warned
Title:  Lord de Winter of my journey to England; that this time they nearly
Title:  foiled my mission as they foiled the affair of the studs; tell him that
Title:  among these four men two only are to be feared--d'Artagnan and Athos;
Title:  tell him that the third, Aramis, is the lover of Madame de Chevreuse--he
Title:  may be left alone, we know his secret, and it may be useful; as to the
Title:  fourth, Porthos, he is a fool, a simpleton, a blustering booby, not
Title:  worth troubling himself about."
Title:  
Title:  "But these four men must be now at the siege of La Rochelle?"
Title:  
Title:  "I thought so, too; but a letter which Madame Bonacieux has received
Title:  from Madame the Constable, and which she has had the imprudence to show
Title:  me, leads me to believe that these four men, on the contrary, are on the
Title:  road hither to take her away."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil!  What's to be done?"
Title:  
Title:  "What did the cardinal say about me?"
Title:  
Title:  "I was to take your dispatches, written or verbal, and return by post;
Title:  and when he shall know what you have done, he will advise what you have
Title:  to do."
Title:  
Title:  "I must, then, remain here?"
Title:  
Title:  "Here, or in the neighborhood."
Title:  
Title:  "You cannot take me with you?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, the order is imperative.  Near the camp you might be recognized;
Title:  and your presence, you must be aware, would compromise the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Then I must wait here, or in the neighborhood?"
Title:  
Title:  "Only tell me beforehand where you will wait for intelligence from the
Title:  cardinal; let me know always where to find you."
Title:  
Title:  "Observe, it is probable that I may not be able to remain here."
Title:  
Title:  "Why?"
Title:  
Title:  "You forget that my enemies may arrive at any minute."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true; but is this little woman, then, to escape his Eminence?"
Title:  
Title:  "Bah!"  said Milady, with a smile that belonged only to herself; "you
Title:  forget that I am her best friend."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, that's true!  I may then tell the cardinal, with respect to this
Title:  little woman--"
Title:  
Title:  "That he may be at ease."
Title:  
Title:  "Is that all?"
Title:  
Title:  "He will know what that means."
Title:  
Title:  "He will guess, at least.  Now, then, what had I better do?"
Title:  
Title:  "Return instantly.  It appears to me that the news you bear is worth the
Title:  trouble of a little diligence."
Title:  
Title:  "My chaise broke down coming into Lilliers."
Title:  
Title:  "Capital!"
Title:  
Title:  "What, CAPITAL?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I want your chaise."
Title:  
Title:  "And how shall I travel, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "On horseback."
Title:  
Title:  "You talk very comfortably,--a hundred and eighty leagues!"
Title:  
Title:  "What's that?"
Title:  
Title:  "One can do it!  Afterward?"
Title:  
Title:  "Afterward?  Why, in passing through Lilliers you will send me your
Title:  chaise, with an order to your servant to place himself at my disposal."
Title:  
Title:  "Well."
Title:  
Title:  "You have, no doubt, some order from the cardinal about you?"
Title:  
Title:  "I have my FULL POWER."
Title:  
Title:  "Show it to the abbess, and tell her that someone will come and fetch
Title:  me, either today or tomorrow, and that I am to follow the person who
Title:  presents himself in your name."
Title:  
Title:  "Very well."
Title:  
Title:  "Don't forget to treat me harshly in speaking of me to the abbess."
Title:  
Title:  "To what purpose?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am a victim of the cardinal.  It is necessary to inspire confidence
Title:  in that poor little Madame Bonacieux."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true.  Now, will you make me a report of all that has happened?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, I have related the events to you.  You have a good memory; repeat
Title:  what I have told you.  A paper may be lost."
Title:  
Title:  "You are right; only let me know where to find you that I may not run
Title:  needlessly about the neighborhood."
Title:  
Title:  "That's correct; wait!"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you want a map?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I know this country marvelously!"
Title:  
Title:  "You?  When were you here?"
Title:  
Title:  "I was brought up here."
Title:  
Title:  "Truly?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is worth something, you see, to have been brought up somewhere."
Title:  
Title:  "You will wait for me, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Let me reflect a little!  Ay, that will do--at Armentieres."
Title:  
Title:  "Where is that Armentieres?"
Title:  
Title:  "A little town on the Lys; I shall only have to cross the river, and I
Title:  shall be in a foreign country."
Title:  
Title:  "Capital!  but it is understood you will only cross the river in case of
Title:  danger."
Title:  
Title:  "That is well understood."
Title:  
Title:  "And in that case, how shall I know where you are?"
Title:  
Title:  "You do not want your lackey?"
Title:  
Title:  "Is he a sure man?"
Title:  
Title:  "To the proof."
Title:  
Title:  "Give him to me. Nobody knows him.  I will leave him at the place I
Title:  quit, and he will conduct you to me."
Title:  
Title:  "And you say you will wait for me at Armentieres?"
Title:  
Title:  "At Armentieres."
Title:  
Title:  "Write that name on a bit of paper, lest I should forget it.  There is
Title:  nothing compromising in the name of a town.  Is it not so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Eh, who knows?  Never mind," said Milady, writing the name on half a
Title:  sheet of paper; "I will compromise myself."
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Rochefort, taking the paper from Milady, folding it, and
Title:  placing it in the lining of his hat, "you may be easy.  I will do as
Title:  children do, for fear of losing the paper--repeat the name along the
Title:  route.  Now, is that all?"
Title:  
Title:  "I believe so."
Title:  
Title:  "Let us see:  Buckingham dead or grievously wounded; your conversation
Title:  with the cardinal overheard by the four Musketeers; Lord de Winter
Title:  warned of your arrival at Portsmouth; d'Artagnan and Athos to the
Title:  Bastille; Aramis the lover of Madame de Chevreuse; Porthos an ass;
Title:  Madame Bonacieux found again; to send you the chaise as soon as
Title:  possible; to place my lackey at your disposal; to make you out a victim
Title:  of the cardinal in order that the abbess may entertain no suspicion;
Title:  Armentieres, on the banks of the Lys. Is that all, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "In truth, my dear Chevalier, you are a miracle of memory.  A PROPOS,
Title:  add one thing--"
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "I saw some very pretty woods which almost touch the convent garden.
Title:  Say that I am permitted to walk in those woods.  Who knows?  Perhaps I
Title:  shall stand in need of a back door for retreat."
Title:  
Title:  "You think of everything."
Title:  
Title:  "And you forget one thing."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "To ask me if I want money."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true.  How much do you want?"
Title:  
Title:  "All you have in gold."
Title:  
Title:  "I have five hundred pistoles, or thereabouts."
Title:  
Title:  "I have as much.  With a thousand pistoles one may face everything.
Title:  Empty your pockets."
Title:  
Title:  "There."
Title:  
Title:  "Right.  And you go--"
Title:  
Title:  "In an hour--time to eat a morsel, during which I shall send for a post
Title:  horse."
Title:  
Title:  "Capital!  Adieu, Chevalier."
Title:  
Title:  "Adieu, Countess."
Title:  
Title:  "Commend me to the cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "Commend me to Satan."
Title:  
Title:  Milady and Rochefort exchanged a smile and separated.  An hour afterward
Title:  Rochefort set out at a grand gallop; five hours after that he passed
Title:  through Arras.
Title:  
Title:  Our readers already know how he was recognized by d'Artagnan, and how
Title:  that recognition by inspiring fear in the four Musketeers had given
Title:  fresh activity to their journey.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  63  THE DROP OF WATER
Title:  
Title:  Rochefort had scarcely departed when Mme. Bonacieux re-entered.  She
Title:  found Milady with a smiling countenance.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said the young woman, "what you dreaded has happened.  This
Title:  evening, or tomorrow, the cardinal will send someone to take you away."
Title:  
Title:  "Who told you that, my dear?"  asked Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "I heard it from the mouth of the messenger himself."
Title:  
Title:  "Come and sit down close to me," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Here I am."
Title:  
Title:  "Wait till I assure myself that nobody hears us."
Title:  
Title:  "Why all these precautions?"
Title:  
Title:  "You shall know."
Title:  
Title:  Milady arose, went to the door, opened it, looked in the corridor, and
Title:  then returned and seated herself close to Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "Then," said she, "he has well played his part."
Title:  
Title:  "Who has?"
Title:  
Title:  "He who just now presented himself to the abbess as a messenger from the
Title:  cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "It was, then, a part he was playing?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, my child."
Title:  
Title:  "That man, then, was not--"
Title:  
Title:  "That man," said Milady, lowering her voice, "is my brother."
Title:  
Title:  "Your brother!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  "No one must know this secret, my dear, but yourself.  If you reveal it
Title:  to anyone in the world, I shall be lost, and perhaps yourself likewise."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!"
Title:  
Title:  "Listen.  This is what has happened:  My brother, who was coming to my
Title:  assistance to take me away by force if it were necessary, met with the
Title:  emissary of the cardinal, who was coming in search of me.  He followed
Title:  him.  At a solitary and retired part of the road he drew his sword, and
Title:  required the messenger to deliver up to him the papers of which he was
Title:  the bearer.  The messenger resisted; my brother killed him."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!" said Mme. Bonacieux, shuddering.
Title:  
Title:  "Remember, that was the only means.  Then my brother determined to
Title:  substitute cunning for force.  He took the papers, and presented himself
Title:  here as the emissary of the cardinal, and in an hour or two a carriage
Title:  will come to take me away by the orders of his Eminence."
Title:  
Title:  "I understand.  It is your brother who sends this carriage."
Title:  
Title:  "Exactly; but that is not all.  That letter you have received, and
Title:  which you believe to be from Madame de Chevreuse--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is a forgery."
Title:  
Title:  "How can that be?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, a forgery; it is a snare to prevent your making any resistance
Title:  when they come to fetch you."
Title:  
Title:  "But it is d'Artagnan that will come."
Title:  
Title:  "Do not deceive yourself.  D'Artagnan and his friends are detained at the
Title:  siege of La Rochelle."
Title:  
Title:  "How do you know that?"
Title:  
Title:  "My brother met some emissaries of the cardinal in the uniform of
Title:  Musketeers.  You would have been summoned to the gate; you would have
Title:  believed yourself about to meet friends; you would have been abducted,
Title:  and conducted back to Paris."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!  My senses fail me amid such a chaos of iniquities. I feel,
Title:  if this continues," said Mme. Bonacieux, raising her hands to her
Title:  forehead, "I shall go mad!"
Title:  
Title:  "Stop--"
Title:  
Title:  "What?"
Title:  
Title:  "I hear a horse's steps; it is my brother setting off again.  I should
Title:  like to offer him a last salute.  Come!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady opened the window, and made a sign to Mme. Bonacieux to join her.
Title:  The young woman complied.
Title:  
Title:  Rochefort passed at a gallop.
Title:  
Title:  "Adieu, brother!" cried Milady.
Title:  
Title:  The chevalier raised his head, saw the two young women, and without
Title:  stopping, waved his hand in a friendly way to Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "The good George!"  said she, closing the window with an expression of
Title:  countenance full of affection and melancholy.  And she resumed her seat,
Title:  as if plunged in reflections entirely personal.
Title:  
Title:  "Dear lady," said Mme. Bonacieux, "pardon me for interrupting you; but
Title:  what do you advise me to do?  Good heaven!  You have more experience
Title:  than I have.  Speak; I will listen."
Title:  
Title:  "In the first place," said Milady, "it is possible I may be deceived,
Title:  and that d'Artagnan and his friends may really come to your assistance."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, that would be too much!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux, "so much happiness
Title:  is not in store for me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Then you comprehend it would be only a question of time, a sort of
Title:  race, which should arrive first.  If your friends are the more speedy,
Title:  you are to be saved; if the satellites of the cardinal, you are lost."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, yes; lost beyond redemption!  What, then, to do?  What to do?"
Title:  
Title:  "There would be a very simple means, very natural--"
Title:  
Title:  "Tell me what!"
Title:  
Title:  "To wait, concealed in the neighborhood, and assure yourself who are the
Title:  men who come to ask for you."
Title:  
Title:  "But where can I wait?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, there is no difficulty in that.  I shall stop and conceal myself a
Title:  few leagues hence until my brother can rejoin me.  Well, I take you with
Title:  me; we conceal ourselves, and wait together."
Title:  
Title:  "But I shall not be allowed to go; I am almost a prisoner."
Title:  
Title:  "As they believe that I go in consequence of an order from the cardinal,
Title:  no one will believe you anxious to follow me."
Title:  
Title:  "Well?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well!  The carriage is at the door; you bid me adieu; you mount the
Title:  step to embrace me a last time; my brother's servant, who comes to fetch
Title:  me, is told how to proceed; he makes a sign to the postillion, and we
Title:  set off at a gallop."
Title:  
Title:  "But d'Artagnan!  D'Artagnan!  if he comes?"
Title:  
Title:  "Shall we not know it?"
Title:  
Title:  "How?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing easier.  We will send my brother's servant back to Bethune,
Title:  whom, as I told you, we can trust.  He shall assume a disguise, and
Title:  place himself in front of the convent.  If the emissaries of the
Title:  cardinal arrive, he will take no notice; if it is Monsieur d'Artagnan
Title:  and his friends, he will bring them to us."
Title:  
Title:  "He knows them, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Doubtless.  Has he not seen Monsieur d'Artagnan at my house?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes, yes; you are right.  Thus all may go well--all may be for the
Title:  best; but we do not go far from this place?"
Title:  
Title:  "Seven or eight leagues at the most.  We will keep on the frontiers, for
Title:  instance; and at the first alarm we can leave France."
Title:  
Title:  "And what can we do there?"
Title:  
Title:  "Wait."
Title:  
Title:  "But if they come?"
Title:  
Title:  "My brother's carriage will be here first."
Title:  
Title:  "If I should happen to be any distance from you when the carriage comes
Title:  for you--at dinner or supper, for instance?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do one thing."
Title:  
Title:  "What is that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Tell your good superior that in order that we may be as much together
Title:  as possible, you ask her permission to share my repast."
Title:  
Title:  "Will she permit it?"
Title:  
Title:  "What inconvenience can it be?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, delightful!  In this way we shall not be separated for an instant."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, go down to her, then, to make your request.  I feel my head a
Title:  little confused; I will take a turn in the garden."
Title:  
Title:  "Go and where shall I find you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Here, in an hour."
Title:  
Title:  "Here, in an hour.  Oh, you are so kind, and I am so grateful!"
Title:  
Title:  "How can I avoid interesting myself for one who is so beautiful and so
Title:  amiable? Are you not the beloved of one of my best friends?"
Title:  
Title:  "Dear d'Artagnan!  Oh, how he will thank you!"
Title:  
Title:  "I hope so.  Now, then, all is agreed; let us go down."
Title:  
Title:  "You are going into the garden?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes."
Title:  
Title:  "Go along this corridor, down a little staircase, and you are in it."
Title:  
Title:  "Excellent; thank you!"
Title:  
Title:  And the two women parted, exchanging charming smiles.
Title:  
Title:  Milady had told the truth--her head was confused, for her ill-arranged
Title:  plans clashed one another like chaos.  She required to be alone that
Title:  she might put her thoughts a little into order.  She saw vaguely the
Title:  future; but she stood in need of a little silence and quiet to give all
Title:  her ideas, as yet confused, a distinct form and a regular plan.
Title:  
Title:  What was most pressing was to get Mme. Bonacieux away, and convey her to
Title:  a place of safety, and there, if matters required, make her a hostage.
Title:  Milady began to have doubts of the issue of this terrible duel, in which
Title:  her enemies showed as much perseverance as she did animosity.
Title:  
Title:  Besides, she felt as we feel when a storm is coming on--that this issue
Title:  was near, and could not fail to be terrible.
Title:  
Title:  The principal thing for her, then, was, as we have said, to keep Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux in her power.  Mme. Bonacieux was the very life of d'Artagnan.
Title:  This was more than his life, the life of the woman he loved; this was,
Title:  in case of ill fortune, a means of temporizing and obtaining good
Title:  conditions.
Title:  
Title:  Now, this point was settled; Mme. Bonacieux, without any suspicion,
Title:  accompanied her.  Once concealed with her at Armentieres, it would be
Title:  easy to make her believe that d'Artagnan had not come to Bethune.  In
Title:  fifteen days at most, Rochefort would be back; besides, during that
Title:  fifteen days she would have time to think how she could best avenge
Title:  herself on the four friends.  She would not be weary, thank God!  for
Title:  she should enjoy the sweetest pastime such events could accord a woman
Title:  of her character--perfecting a beautiful vengeance.
Title:  
Title:  Revolving all this in her mind, she cast her eyes around her, and
Title:  arranged the topography of the garden in her head.  Milady was like a
Title:  good general who contemplates at the same time victory and defeat, and
Title:  who is quite prepared, according to the chances of the battle, to march
Title:  forward or to beat a retreat.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of an hour she heard a soft voice calling her; it was Mme.
Title:  Bonacieux's.  The good abbess had naturally consented to her request;
Title:  and as a commencement, they were to sup together.
Title:  
Title:  On reaching the courtyard, they heard the noise of a carriage which
Title:  stopped at the gate.
Title:  
Title:  Milady listened.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you hear anything?"  said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, the rolling of a carriage."
Title:  
Title:  "It is the one my brother sends for us."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!"
Title:  
Title:  "Come, come!  courage!"
Title:  
Title:  The bell of the convent gate was sounded; Milady was not mistaken.
Title:  
Title:  "Go to your chamber," said she to Mme. Bonacieux; "you have perhaps some
Title:  jewels you would like to take."
Title:  
Title:  "I have his letters," said she.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, go and fetch them, and come to my apartment.  We will snatch some
Title:  supper; we shall perhaps travel part of the night, and must keep our
Title:  strength up."
Title:  
Title:  "Great God!"  said Mme. Bonacieux, placing her hand upon her bosom, "my
Title:  heart beats so I cannot walk."
Title:  
Title:  "Courage, courage!  remember that in a quarter of an hour you will be
Title:  safe; and think that what you are about to do is for HIS sake."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, everything for him.  You have restored my courage by a single
Title:  word; go, I will rejoin you."
Title:  
Title:  Milady ran up to her apartment quickly; she there found Rochefort's
Title:  lackey, and gave him his instructions.
Title:  
Title:  He was to wait at the gate; if by chance the Musketeers should appear,
Title:  the carriage was to set off as fast as possible, pass around the
Title:  convent, and go and wait for Milady at a little village which was
Title:  situated at the other side of the wood.  In this case Milady would cross
Title:  the garden and gain the village on foot.  As we have already said,
Title:  Milady was admirably acquainted with this part of France.
Title:  
Title:  If the Musketeers did not appear, things were to go on as had been
Title:  agreed; Mme. Bonacieux was to get into the carriage as if to bid her
Title:  adieu, and she was to take away Mme. Bonacieux.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux came in; and to remove all suspicion, if she had any,
Title:  Milady repeated to the lackey, before her, the latter part of her
Title:  instructions.
Title:  
Title:  Milady asked some questions about the carriage.  It was a chaise drawn
Title:  by three horses, driven by a postillion; Rochefort's lackey would
Title:  precede it, as courier.
Title:  
Title:  Milady was wrong in fearing that Mme. Bonacieux would have any
Title:  suspicion.  The poor young woman was too pure to suppose that any female
Title:  could be guilty of such perfidy; besides, the name of the Comtesse de
Title:  Winter, which she had heard the abbess pronounce, was wholly unknown to
Title:  her, and she was even ignorant that a woman had had so great and so
Title:  fatal a share in the misfortune of her life.
Title:  
Title:  "You see," said she, when the lackey had gone out, "everything is ready.
Title:  The abbess suspects nothing, and believes that I am taken by order of
Title:  the cardinal.  This man goes to give his last orders; take the least
Title:  thing, drink a finger of wine, and let us be gone."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Mme. Bonacieux, mechanically, "yes, let us be gone."
Title:  
Title:  Milady made her a sign to sit down opposite, poured her a small glass of
Title:  Spanish wine, and helped her to the wing of a chicken.
Title:  
Title:  "See," said she, "if everything does not second us!  Here is night
Title:  coming on; by daybreak we shall have reached our retreat, and nobody can
Title:  guess where we are.  Come, courage!  take something."
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux ate a few mouthfuls mechanically, and just touched the
Title:  glass with her lips.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, come!"  said Milady, lifting hers to her mouth, "do as I do."
Title:  
Title:  But at the moment the glass touched her lips, her hand remained
Title:  suspended; she heard something on the road which sounded like the
Title:  rattling of a distant gallop.  Then it grew nearer, and it seemed to
Title:  her, almost at the same time, that she heard the neighing of horses.
Title:  
Title:  This noise acted upon her joy like the storm which awakens the sleeper
Title:  in the midst of a happy dream; she grew pale and ran to the window,
Title:  while Mme. Bonacieux, rising all in a tremble, supported herself upon
Title:  her chair to avoid falling.  Nothing was yet to be seen, only they heard
Title:  the galloping draw nearer.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!"  said Mme. Bonacieux, "what is that noise?"
Title:  
Title:  "That of either our friends or our enemies," said Milady, with her
Title:  terrible coolness.  "Stay where you are, I will tell you."
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux remained standing, mute, motionless, and pale as a
Title:  statue.
Title:  
Title:  The noise became louder; the horses could not be more than a hundred and
Title:  fifty paces distant.  If they were not yet to be seen, it was because
Title:  the road made an elbow.  The noise became so distinct that the horses
Title:  might be counted by the rattle of their hoofs.
Title:  
Title:  Milady gazed with all the power of her attention; it was just light
Title:  enough for her to see who was coming.
Title:  
Title:  All at once, at the turning of the road she saw the glitter of laced
Title:  hats and the waving of feathers; she counted two, then five, then eight
Title:  horsemen.  One of them preceded the rest by double the length of his
Title:  horse.
Title:  
Title:  Milady uttered a stifled groan.  In the first horseman she recognized
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God," cried Mme. Bonacieux, "what is it?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is the uniform of the cardinal's Guards.  Not an instant to be lost!
Title:  Fly, fly!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, let us fly!"  repeated Mme. Bonacieux, but without being able
Title:  to make a step, glued as she was to the spot by terror.
Title:  
Title:  They heard the horsemen pass under the windows.
Title:  
Title:  "Come, then, come, then!"  cried Milady, trying to drag the young woman
Title:  along by the arm. "Thanks to the garden, we yet can flee; I have the
Title:  key, but make haste!  in five minutes it will be too late!"
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux tried to walk, made two steps, and sank upon her knees.
Title:  Milady tried to raise and carry her, but could not do it.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment they heard the rolling of the carriage, which at the
Title:  approach of the Musketeers set off at a gallop.  Then three or four
Title:  shots were fired.
Title:  
Title:  "For the last time, will you come?"  cried Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God, my God!  you see my strength fails me; you see plainly I
Title:  cannot walk.  Flee alone!"
Title:  
Title:  "Flee alone, and leave you here?  No, no, never!"  cried Milady.
Title:  
Title:  All at once she paused, a livid flash darted from her eyes; she ran to
Title:  the table, emptied into Mme. Bonacieux's glass the contents of a ring
Title:  which she opened with singular quickness.  It was a grain of a reddish
Title:  color, which dissolved immediately.
Title:  
Title:  Then, taking the glass with a firm hand, she said, "Drink.  This wine
Title:  will give you strength, drink!"  And she put the glass to the lips of
Title:  the young woman, who drank mechanically.
Title:  
Title:  "This is not the way that I wished to avenge myself," said Milady,
Title:  replacing the glass upon the table, with an infernal smile, "but, my
Title:  faith!  we do what we can!"  And she rushed out of the room.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux saw her go without being able to follow her; she was like
Title:  people who dream they are pursued, and who in vain try to walk.
Title:  
Title:  A few moments passed; a great noise was heard at the gate.  Every
Title:  instant Mme. Bonacieux expected to see Milady, but she did not return.
Title:  Several times, with terror, no doubt, the cold sweat burst from her
Title:  burning brow.
Title:  
Title:  At length she heard the grating of the hinges of the opening gates; the
Title:  noise of boots and spurs resounded on the stairs.  There was a great
Title:  murmur of voices which continued to draw near, amid which she seemed to
Title:  hear her own name pronounced.
Title:  
Title:  All at once she uttered a loud cry of joy, and darted toward the door;
Title:  she had recognized the voice of d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan!  D'Artagnan!"  cried she, "is it you?  This way!  this
Title:  way!"
Title:  
Title:  "Constance?  Constance?"  replied the young man, "where are you? where
Title:  are you?  My God!"
Title:  
Title:  At the same moment the door of the cell yielded to a shock, rather than
Title:  opened; several men rushed into the chamber.  Mme. Bonacieux had sunk
Title:  into an armchair, without the power of moving.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan threw down a yet-smoking pistol which he held in his hand,
Title:  and fell on his knees before his mistress.  Athos replaced his in his
Title:  belt; Porthos and Aramis, who held their drawn swords in their hands,
Title:  returned them to their scabbards.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, d'Artagnan, my beloved d'Artagnan!  You have come, then, at last!
Title:  You have not deceived me!  It is indeed thee!"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, Constance.  Reunited!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, it was in vain she told me you would not come!  I hoped in silence.
Title:  I was not willing to fly.  Oh, I have done well!  How happy I am!"
Title:  
Title:  At this word SHE, Athos, who had seated himself quietly, started up.
Title:  
Title:  "SHE!  What she?"  asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, my companion.  She who out of friendship for me wished to take me
Title:  from my persecutors.  She who, mistaking you for the cardinal's Guards,
Title:  has just fled away."
Title:  
Title:  "Your companion!"  cried d'Artagnan, becoming more pale than the white
Title:  veil of his mistress.  "Of what companion are you speaking, dear
Title:  Constance?"
Title:  
Title:  "Of her whose carriage was at the gate; of a woman who calls herself
Title:  your friend; of a woman to whom you have told everything."
Title:  
Title:  "Her name, her name!"  cried d'Artagnan.  "My God, can you not remember
Title:  her name?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, it was pronounced in my hearing once.  Stop--but--it is very
Title:  strange--oh, my God, my head swims!  I cannot see!"
Title:  
Title:  "Help, help, my friends!  her hands are icy cold," cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  "She is ill!  Great God, she is losing her senses!"
Title:  
Title:  While Porthos was calling for help with all the power of his strong
Title:  voice, Aramis ran to the table to get a glass of water; but he stopped
Title:  at seeing the horrible alteration that had taken place in the
Title:  countenance of Athos, who, standing before the table, his hair rising
Title:  from his head, his eyes fixed in stupor, was looking at one of the
Title:  glasses, and appeared a prey to the most horrible doubt.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!"  said Athos, "oh, no, it is impossible!  God would not permit such
Title:  a crime!"
Title:  
Title:  "Water, water!"  cried d'Artagnan.  "Water!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, poor woman, poor woman!"  murmured Athos, in a broken voice.
Title:  
Title:  Mme. Bonacieux opened her eyes under the kisses of d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "She revives!"  cried the young man.  "Oh, my God, my God, I thank
Title:  thee!"
Title:  
Title:  "Madame!"  said Athos, "madame, in the name of heaven, whose empty glass
Title:  is this?"
Title:  
Title:  "Mine, monsieur," said the young woman, in a dying voice.
Title:  
Title:  "But who poured the wine for you that was in this glass?"
Title:  
Title:  "She."
Title:  
Title:  "But who is SHE?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I remember!"  said Mme. Bonacieux, "the Comtesse de Winter."
Title:  
Title:  The four friends uttered one and the same cry, but that of Athos
Title:  dominated all the rest.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment the countenance of Mme. Bonacieux became livid; a fearful
Title:  agony pervaded her frame, and she sank panting into the arms of Porthos
Title:  and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan seized the hands of Athos with an anguish difficult to be
Title:  described.
Title:  
Title:  "And what do you believe?'  His voice was stifled by sobs.
Title:  
Title:  "I believe everything," said Athos biting his lips till the blood sprang
Title:  to avoid sighing.
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan, d'Artagnan!"  cried Mme. Bonacieux, "where art thou?  Do
Title:  not leave me!  You see I am dying!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan released the hands of Athos which he still held clasped in
Title:  both his own, and hastened to her.  Her beautiful face was distorted
Title:  with agony; her glassy eyes had no longer their sight; a convulsive
Title:  shuddering shook her whole body; the sweat rolled from her brow.
Title:  
Title:  "In the name of heaven, run, call!  Aramis!  Porthos!  Call for help!"
Title:  
Title:  "Useless!"  said Athos, "useless!  For the poison which SHE pours there
Title:  is no antidote."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes!  Help, help!"  murmured Mme. Bonacieux; "help!"
Title:  
Title:  Then, collecting all her strength, she took the head of the young man
Title:  between her hands, looked at him for an instant as if her whole soul
Title:  passed into that look, and with a sobbing cry pressed her lips to his.
Title:  
Title:  "Constance, Constance!"  cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  A sigh escaped from the mouth of Mme. Bonacieux, and dwelt for an
Title:  instant on the lips of d'Artagnan.  That sigh was the soul, so chaste
Title:  and so loving, which reascended to heaven.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan pressed nothing but a corpse in his arms.  The young man
Title:  uttered a cry, and fell by the side of his mistress as pale and as icy
Title:  as herself.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos wept; Aramis pointed toward heaven; Athos made the sign of the
Title:  cross.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment a man appeared in the doorway, almost as pale as those in
Title:  the chamber.  He looked around him and saw Mme. Bonacieux dead, and
Title:  d'Artagnan in a swoon.  He appeared just at that moment of stupor which
Title:  follows great catastrophes.
Title:  
Title:  "I was not deceived," said he; "here is Monsieur d'Artagnan; and you are
Title:  his friends, Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis."
Title:  
Title:  The persons whose names were thus pronounced looked at the stranger with
Title:  astonishment.  It seemed to all three that they knew him.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," resumed the newcomer, "you are, as I am, in search of a
Title:  woman who," added he, with a terrible smile, "must have passed this way,
Title:  for I see a corpse."
Title:  
Title:  The three friends remained mute--for although the voice as well as the
Title:  countenance reminded them of someone they had seen, they could not
Title:  remember under what circumstances.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," continued the stranger, "since you do not recognize a man
Title:  who probably owes his life to you twice, I must name myself.  I am Lord
Title:  de Winter, brother-in-law of THAT WOMAN."
Title:  
Title:  The three friends uttered a cry of surprise.
Title:  
Title:  Athos rose, and offering him his hand, "Be welcome, my Lord," said he,
Title:  "you are one of us."
Title:  
Title:  "I set out five hours after her from Portsmouth," said Lord de Winter.
Title:  "I arrived three hours after her at Boulogne.  I missed her by twenty
Title:  minutes at St. Omer.  Finally, at Lilliers I lost all trace of her.  I
Title:  was going about at random, inquiring of everybody, when I saw you
Title:  gallop past.  I recognized Monsieur d'Artagnan.  I called to you, but
Title:  you did not answer me; I wished to follow you, but my horse was too much
Title:  fatigued to go at the same pace with yours.  And yet it appears, in
Title:  spite of all your diligence, you have arrived too late."
Title:  
Title:  "You see!"  said Athos, pointing to Mme. Bonacieux dead, and to
Title:  d'Artagnan, whom Porthos and Aramis were trying to recall to life.
Title:  
Title:  "Are they both dead?"  asked Lord de Winter, sternly.
Title:  
Title:  "No," replied Athos, "fortunately Monsieur d'Artagnan has only fainted."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, indeed, so much the better!"  said Lord de Winter.
Title:  
Title:  At that moment d'Artagnan opened his eyes.  He tore himself from the
Title:  arms of Porthos and Aramis, and threw himself like a madman on the
Title:  corpse of his mistress.
Title:  
Title:  Athos rose, walked toward his friend with a slow and solemn step,
Title:  embraced him tenderly, and as he burst into violent sobs, he said to him
Title:  with his noble and persuasive voice, "Friend, be a man!  Women weep for
Title:  the dead; men avenge them!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, yes!"  cried d'Artagnan, "yes!  If it be to avenge her, I am ready
Title:  to follow you."
Title:  
Title:  Athos profited by this moment of strength which the hope of vengeance
Title:  restored to his unfortunate friend to make a sign to Porthos and Aramis
Title:  to go and fetch the superior.
Title:  
Title:  The two friends met her in the corridor, greatly troubled and much upset
Title:  by such strange events; she called some of the nuns, who against all
Title:  monastic custom found themselves in the presence of five men.
Title:  
Title:  "Madame," said Athos, passing his arm under that of d'Artagnan, "we
Title:  abandon to your pious care the body of that unfortunate woman.  She was
Title:  an angel on earth before being an angel in heaven.  Treat her as one of
Title:  your sisters.  We will return someday to pray over her grave."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan concealed his face in the bosom of Athos, and sobbed aloud.
Title:  
Title:  "Weep," said Athos, "weep, heart full of love, youth, and life!  Alas,
Title:  would I could weep like you!"
Title:  
Title:  And he drew away his friend, as affectionate as a father, as consoling
Title:  as a priest, noble as a man who has suffered much.
Title:  
Title:  All five, followed by their lackeys leading their horses, took their way
Title:  to the town of Bethune, whose outskirts they perceived, and stopped
Title:  before the first inn they came to.
Title:  
Title:  "But," said d'Artagnan, "shall we not pursue that woman?"
Title:  
Title:  "Later," said Athos.  "I have measures to take."
Title:  
Title:  "She will escape us," replied the young man; "she will escape us, and it
Title:  will be your fault, Athos."
Title:  
Title:  "I will be accountable for her," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan had so much confidence in the word of his friend that he
Title:  lowered his head, and entered the inn without reply.
Title:  
Title:  Porthos and Aramis regarded each other, not understanding this assurance
Title:  of Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter believed he spoke in this manner to soothe the grief of
Title:  d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, gentlemen," said Athos, when he had ascertained there were five
Title:  chambers free in the hotel, "let everyone retire to his own apartment.
Title:  d'Artagnan needs to be alone, to weep and to sleep.  I take charge of
Title:  everything; be easy."
Title:  
Title:  "It appears, however," said Lord de Winter, "if there are any measures
Title:  to take against the countess, it concerns me; she is my sister-in-law."
Title:  
Title:  "And me," said Athos, "--she is my wife!"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan smiled--for he understood that Athos was sure of his
Title:  vengeance when he revealed such a secret.  Porthos and Aramis looked at
Title:  each other, and grew pale.  Lord de Winter thought Athos was mad.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, retire to your chambers," said Athos, "and leave me to act.  You
Title:  must perceive that in my quality of a husband this concerns me.  Only,
Title:  d'Artagnan, if you have not lost it, give me the paper which fell from
Title:  that man's hat, upon which is written the name of the village of--"
Title:  
Title:  "Ah," said d'Artagnan, "I comprehend!  that name written in her hand."
Title:  
Title:  "You see, then," said Athos, "there is a god in heaven still!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  64  THE MAN IN THE RED CLOAK
Title:  
Title:  The despair of Athos had given place to a concentrated grief which only
Title:  rendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinary
Title:  man.
Title:  
Title:  Possessed by one single thought--that of the promise he had made, and of
Title:  the responsibility he had taken--he retired last to his chamber, begged
Title:  the host to procure him a map of the province, bent over it, examined
Title:  every line traced upon it, perceived that there were four different
Title:  roads from Bethune to Armentieres, and summoned the lackeys.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet, Grimaud, Bazin, and Mousqueton presented themselves, and
Title:  received clear, positive, and serious orders from Athos.
Title:  
Title:  They must set out the next morning at daybreak, and go to Armentieres--
Title:  each by a different route.  Planchet, the most intelligent of the four,
Title:  was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon which the four
Title:  friends had fired, and which was accompanied, as may be remembered, by
Title:  Rochefort's servant.
Title:  
Title:  Athos set the lackeys to work first because, since these men had been in
Title:  the service of himself and his friends he had discovered in each of them
Title:  different and essential qualities.  Then, lackeys who ask questions
Title:  inspire less mistrust than masters, and meet with more sympathy among
Title:  those to whom they address themselves.  Besides, Milady knew the
Title:  masters, and did not know the lackeys; on the contrary, the lackeys knew
Title:  Milady perfectly.
Title:  
Title:  All four were to meet the next day at eleven o'clock.  If they had
Title:  discovered Milady's retreat, three were to remain on guard; the fourth
Title:  was to return to Bethune in order to inform Athos and serve as a guide
Title:  to the four friends.  These arrangements made, the lackeys retired.
Title:  
Title:  Athos then arose from his chair, girded on his sword, enveloped himself
Title:  in his cloak, and left the hotel.  It was nearly ten o'clock.  At ten
Title:  o'clock in the evening, it is well known, the streets in provincial
Title:  towns are very little frequented.  Athos nevertheless was visibly
Title:  anxious to find someone of whom he could ask a question.  At length he
Title:  met a belated passenger, went up to him, and spoke a few words to him.
Title:  The man he addressed recoiled with terror, and only answered the few
Title:  words of the Musketeer by pointing.  Athos offered the man half a
Title:  pistole to accompany him, but the man refused.
Title:  
Title:  Athos then plunged into the street the man had indicated with his
Title:  finger; but arriving at four crossroads, he stopped again, visibly
Title:  embarrassed.  Nevertheless, as the crossroads offered him a better
Title:  chance than any other place of meeting somebody, he stood still.  In a
Title:  few minutes a night watch passed.  Athos repeated to him the same
Title:  question he had asked the first person he met.  The night watch evinced
Title:  the same terror, refused, in his turn, to accompany Athos, and only
Title:  pointed with his hand to the road he was to take.
Title:  
Title:  Athos walked in the direction indicated, and reached the suburb situated
Title:  at the opposite extremity of the city from that by which he and his
Title:  friends had entered it.  There he again appeared uneasy and embarrassed,
Title:  and stopped for the third time.
Title:  
Title:  Fortunately, a mendicant passed, who, coming up to Athos to ask charity,
Title:  Athos offered him half a crown to accompany him where he was going.  The
Title:  mendicant hesitated at first, but at the sight of the piece of silver
Title:  which shone in the darkness he consented, and walked on before Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Arrived at the angle of a street, he pointed to a small house, isolated,
Title:  solitary, and dismal.  Athos went toward the house, while the mendicant,
Title:  who had received his reward, left as fast as his legs could carry him.
Title:  
Title:  Athos went round the house before he could distinguish the door, amid
Title:  the red color in which the house was painted.  No light appeared through
Title:  the chinks of the shutters; no noise gave reason to believe that it was
Title:  inhabited.  It was dark and silent as the tomb.
Title:  
Title:  Three times Athos knocked without receiving an answer.  At the third
Title:  knock, however, steps were heard inside.  The door at length was opened,
Title:  and a man appeared, of high stature, pale complexion, and black hair and
Title:  beard.
Title:  
Title:  Athos and he exchanged some words in a low voice, then the tall man made
Title:  a sign to the Musketeer that he might come in.  Athos immediately
Title:  profited by the permission, and the door was closed behind him.
Title:  
Title:  The man whom Athos had come so far to seek, and whom he had found with
Title:  so much trouble, introduced him into his laboratory, where he was
Title:  engaged in fastening together with iron wire the dry bones of a
Title:  skeleton.  All the frame was adjusted except the head, which lay on the
Title:  table.
Title:  
Title:  All the rest of the furniture indicated that the dweller in this house
Title:  occupied himself with the study of natural science.  There were large
Title:  bottles filled with serpents, ticketed according to their species; dried
Title:  lizards shone like emeralds set in great squares of black wood, and
Title:  bunches of wild odoriferous herbs, doubtless possessed of virtues
Title:  unknown to common men, were fastened to the ceiling and hung down in the
Title:  corners of the apartment.  There was no family, no servant; the tall man
Title:  alone inhabited this house.
Title:  
Title:  Athos cast a cold and indifferent glance upon the objects we have
Title:  described, and at the invitation of him whom he came to seek sat down
Title:  near him.
Title:  
Title:  Then he explained to him the cause of his visit, and the service he
Title:  required of him.  But scarcely had he expressed his request when the
Title:  unknown, who remained standing before the Musketeer, drew back with
Title:  signs of terror, and refused.  Then Athos took from his pocket a small
Title:  paper, on which two lines were written, accompanied by a signature and
Title:  a seal, and presented them to him who had made too prematurely these
Title:  signs of repugnance.  The tall man had scarcely read these lines, seen
Title:  the signature, and recognized the seal, when he bowed to denote that he
Title:  had no longer any objection to make, and that he was ready to obey.
Title:  
Title:  Athos required no more.  He arose, bowed, went out, returned by the same
Title:  way he came, re-entered the hotel, and went to his apartment.
Title:  
Title:  At daybreak d'Artagnan entered the chamber, and demanded what was to be
Title:  done.
Title:  
Title:  "To wait," replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Some minutes after, the superior of the convent sent to inform the
Title:  Musketeers that the burial would take place at midday.  As to the
Title:  poisoner, they had heard no tidings of her whatever, only that she must
Title:  have made her escape through the garden, on the sand of which her
Title:  footsteps could be traced, and the door of which had been found shut.
Title:  As to the key, it had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  At the hour appointed, Lord de Winter and the four friends repaired to
Title:  the convent; the bells tolled, the chapel was open, the grating of the
Title:  choir was closed.  In the middle of the choir the body of the victim,
Title:  clothed in her novitiate dress, was exposed.  On each side of the choir
Title:  and behind the gratings opening into the convent was assembled the whole
Title:  community of the Carmelites, who listened to the divine service, and
Title:  mingled their chant with the chant of the priests, without seeing the
Title:  profane, or being seen by them.
Title:  
Title:  At the door of the chapel d'Artagnan felt his courage fall anew,
Title:  and returned to look for Athos; but Athos had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  Faithful to his mission of vengeance, Athos had requested to be
Title:  conducted to the garden; and there upon the sand following the light
Title:  steps of this woman, who left sharp tracks wherever she went, he
Title:  advanced toward the gate which led into the wood, and causing it to be
Title:  opened, he went out into the forest.
Title:  
Title:  Then all his suspicions were confirmed; the road by which the carriage
Title:  had disappeared encircled the forest.  Athos followed the road for some
Title:  time, his eyes fixed upon the ground; slight stains of blood, which came
Title:  from the wound inflicted upon the man who accompanied the carriage as a
Title:  courier, or from one of the horses, dotted the road.  At the end of
Title:  three-quarters of a league, within fifty paces of Festubert, a larger
Title:  bloodstain appeared; the ground was trampled by horses.  Between the
Title:  forest and this accursed spot, a little behind the trampled ground, was
Title:  the same track of small feet as in the garden; the carriage had stopped
Title:  here.  At this spot Milady had come out of the wood, and entered the
Title:  carriage.
Title:  
Title:  Satisfied with this discovery which confirmed all his suspicions, Athos
Title:  returned to the hotel, and found Planchet impatiently waiting for him.
Title:  
Title:  Everything was as Athos had foreseen.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet had followed the road; like Athos, he had discovered the stains
Title:  of blood; like Athos, he had noted the spot where the horses had halted.
Title:  But he had gone farther than Athos--for at the village of Festubert,
Title:  while drinking at an inn, he had learned without needing to ask a
Title:  question that the evening before, at half-past eight, a wounded man who
Title:  accompanied a lady traveling in a post-chaise had been obliged to stop,
Title:  unable to go further.  The accident was set down to the account of
Title:  robbers, who had stopped the chaise in the wood.  The man remained in
Title:  the village; the woman had had a relay of horses, and continued her
Title:  journey.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet went in search of the postillion who had driven her, and found
Title:  him.  He   had taken the lady as far as Fromelles; and from Fromelles
Title:  she had set out for Armentieres.  Planchet took the crossroad, and by
Title:  seven o'clock in the morning he was at Armentieres.
Title:  
Title:  There was but one tavern, the Post.  Planchet went and presented himself
Title:  as a lackey out of a place, who was in search of a situation.  He had
Title:  not chatted ten minutes with the people of the tavern before he learned
Title:  that a woman had come there alone about eleven o'clock the night before,
Title:  had engaged a chamber, had sent for the master of the hotel, and told
Title:  him she desired to remain some time in the neighborhood.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet had no need to learn more.  He hastened to the rendezvous,
Title:  found the lackeys at their posts, placed them as sentinels at all the
Title:  outlets of the hotel, and came to find Athos, who had just received this
Title:  information when his friends returned.
Title:  
Title:  All their countenances were melancholy and gloomy, even the mild
Title:  countenance of Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "What is to be done?" asked d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "To wait!" replied Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Each retired to his own apartment.
Title:  
Title:  At eight o'clock in the evening Athos ordered the horses to be saddled,
Title:  and Lord de Winter and his friends notified that they must prepare for
Title:  the expedition.
Title:  
Title:  In an instant all five were ready.  Each examined his arms, and put them
Title:  in order.  Athos came down last, and found d'Artagnan already on
Title:  horseback, and growing impatient.
Title:  
Title:  "Patience!"  cried Athos; "one of our party is still wanting."
Title:  
Title:  The four horsemen looked round them with astonishment, for they sought
Title:  vainly in their minds to know who this other person could be.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment Planchet brought out Athos's house; the Musketeer leaped
Title:  lightly into the saddle.
Title:  
Title:  "Wait for me," cried he, "I will soon be back," and he set off at a
Title:  gallop.
Title:  
Title:  In a quarter of an hour he returned, accompanied by a tall man, masked,
Title:  and wrapped in a large red cloak.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter and the three Musketeers looked at one another
Title:  inquiringly.  Neither could give the others any information, for all
Title:  were ignorant who this man could be; nevertheless, they felt convinced
Title:  that all was as it should be, as it was done by the order of Athos.
Title:  
Title:  At nine o'clock, guided by Planchet, the little cavalcade set out,
Title:  taking the route the carriage had taken.
Title:  
Title:  It was a melancholy sight--that of these six men, traveling in silence,
Title:  each plunged in his own thoughts, sad as despair, gloomy as
Title:  chastisement.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  65  TRIAL
Title:  
Title:  It was a stormy and dark night; vast clouds covered the heavens,
Title:  concealing the stars; the moon would not rise till midnight.
Title:  
Title:  Occasionally, by the light of a flash of lightning which gleamed along
Title:  the horizon, the road stretched itself before them, white and solitary;
Title:  the flash extinct, all remained in darkness.
Title:  
Title:  Every minute Athos was forced to restrain d'Artagnan, constantly in
Title:  advance of the little troop, and to beg him to keep in the line, which
Title:  in an instant he again departed from.  He had but one thought--to go
Title:  forward; and he went.
Title:  
Title:  They passed in silence through the little village of Festubert, where
Title:  the wounded servant was, and then skirted the wood of Richebourg.  At
Title:  Herlier, Planchet, who led the column, turned to the left.
Title:  
Title:  Several times Lord de Winter, Porthos, or Aramis, tried to talk with the
Title:  man in the red cloak; but to every interrogation which they put to him
Title:  he bowed, without response.  The travelers then comprehended that there
Title:  must be some reason why the unknown preserved such a silence, and ceased
Title:  to address themselves to him.
Title:  
Title:  The storm increased, the flashes succeeded one another more rapidly, the
Title:  thunder began to growl, and the wind, the precursor of a hurricane,
Title:  whistled in the plumes and the hair of the horsemen.
Title:  
Title:  The cavalcade trotted on more sharply.
Title:  
Title:  A little before they came to Fromelles the storm burst.  They spread
Title:  their cloaks.  There remained three leagues to travel, and they did it
Title:  amid torrents of rain.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took off his hat, and could not be persuaded to make use of
Title:  his cloak.  He found pleasure in feeling the water trickle over his
Title:  burning brow and over his body, agitated by feverish shudders.
Title:  
Title:  The moment the little troop passed Goskal and were approaching the Port,
Title:  a man sheltered beneath a tree detached himself from the trunk with
Title:  which he had been confounded in the darkness, and advanced into the
Title:  middle of the road, putting his finger on his lips.
Title:  
Title:  Athos recognized Grimaud.
Title:  
Title:  "What's the manner?" cried Athos.  "Has she left Armentieres?"
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.  D'Artagnan groaned his teeth.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, d'Artagnan!"  said Athos.  I have charged myself with this
Title:  affair.  It is for me, then, to interrogate Grimaud."
Title:  
Title:  "Where is she?"  asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud extended his hands in the direction of the Lys.  "Far from
Title:  here?" asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud showed his master his forefinger bent.
Title:  
Title:  "Alone?"  asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud made the sign yes.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said Athos, "she is alone within half a league of us, in
Title:  the direction of the river."
Title:  
Title:  "That's well," said d'Artagnan. "Lead us, Grimaud."
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud took his course across the country, and acted as guide to the
Title:  cavalcade.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of five hundred paces, more or less, they came to a rivulet,
Title:  which they forded.
Title:  
Title:  By the aid of the lightning they perceived the village of Erquinheim.
Title:  
Title:  "Is she there, Grimaud?"  asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud shook his head negatively.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence, then!"  cried Athos.
Title:  
Title:  And the troop continued their route.
Title:  
Title:  Another flash illuminated all around them.  Grimaud extended his arm,
Title:  and by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished a
Title:  little isolated house on the banks of the river, within a hundred paces
Title:  of a ferry.
Title:  
Title:  One window was lighted.
Title:  
Title:  "Here we are!"  said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up and
Title:  came towards them.  It was Mousqueton.  He pointed his finger to the
Title:  lighted window.
Title:  
Title:  "She is there," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "And Bazin?"  asked Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "While I watched the window, he guarded the door."
Title:  
Title:  "Good!"  said Athos.  "You are good and faithful servants."
Title:  
Title:  Athos sprang from his horse, gave the bridle to Grimaud, and advanced
Title:  toward the window, after having made a sign to the rest of the troop to
Title:  go toward the door.
Title:  
Title:  The little house was surrounded by a low, quickset hedge, two or three
Title:  feet high.  Athos sprang over the hedge and went up to the window, which
Title:  was without shutters, but had the half-curtains closely drawn.
Title:  
Title:  He mounted the skirting stone that his eyes might look over the curtain.
Title:  
Title:  By the light of a lamp he saw a woman, wrapped in a dark mantle, seated
Title:  upon a stool near a dying fire.  Her elbows were placed upon a mean
Title:  table, and she leaned her head upon her two hands, which were white as
Title:  ivory.
Title:  
Title:  He could not distinguish her countenance, but a sinister smile passed
Title:  over the lips of Athos.  He was not deceived; it was she whom he sought.
Title:  
Title:  At this moment a horse neighed.  Milady raised her head, saw close to
Title:  the panes the pale face of Athos, and screamed.
Title:  
Title:  Athos, perceiving that she knew him, pushed the window with his knee and
Title:  hand.  The window yielded.  The squares were broken to shivers; and
Title:  Athos, like the spectre of vengeance, leaped into the room.
Title:  
Title:  Milady rushed to the door and opened it.  More pale and menacing than
Title:  Athos, d'Artagnan stood on the threshold.
Title:  
Title:  Milady recoiled, uttering a cry.  D'Artagnan, believing she might have
Title:  means of flight and fearing she should escape, drew a pistol from his
Title:  belt; but Athos raised his hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Put back that weapon, d'Artagnan!"  said he; "this woman must be tried,
Title:  not assassinated.  Wait an instant, my friend, and you shall be
Title:  satisfied.  Come in, gentlemen."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan obeyed; for Athos had the solemn voice and the powerful
Title:  gesture of a judge sent by the Lord himself.  Behind d'Artagnan entered
Title:  Porthos, Aramis, Lord de Winter, and the man in the red cloak.
Title:  
Title:  The four lackeys guarded the door and the window.
Title:  
Title:  Milady had sunk into a chair, with her hands extended, as if to conjure
Title:  this terrible apparition.  Perceiving her brother-in-law, she uttered a
Title:  terrible cry.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you want?"  screamed Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "We want," said Athos, "Charlotte Backson, who first was called Comtesse
Title:  de la Fere, and afterwards Milady de Winter, Baroness of Sheffield."
Title:  
Title:  "That is I!  that is I!"  murmured Milady, in extreme terror; "what do
Title:  you want?"
Title:  
Title:  "We wish to judge you according to your crime," said Athos; "you shall
Title:  be free to defend yourself.  Justify yourself if you can.  M.
Title:  d'Artagnan, it is for you to accuse her first."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan advanced.
Title:  
Title:  "Before God and before men," said he, "I accuse this woman of having
Title:  poisoned Constance Bonacieux, who died yesterday evening."
Title:  
Title:  He turned towards Porthos and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "We bear witness to this," said the two Musketeers, with one voice.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan continued:  "Before God and before men, I accuse this woman
Title:  of having attempted to poison me, in wine which she sent me from
Title:  Villeroy, with a forged letter, as if that wine came from my friends.
Title:  God preserved me, but a man named Brisemont died in my place."
Title:  
Title:  "We bear witness to this," said Porthos and Aramis, in the
Title:  same manner as before.
Title:  
Title:  "Before God and before men, I accuse this woman of having urged me to
Title:  the murder of the Baron de Wardes; but as no one else can attest the
Title:  truth of this accusation, I attest it myself.  I have done."  And
Title:  d'Artagnan passed to the other side of the room with Porthos and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Your turn, my Lord," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  The baron came forward.
Title:  
Title:  "Before God and before men," said he, "I accuse this woman of having
Title:  caused the assassination of the Duke of Buckingham."
Title:  
Title:  "The Duke of Buckingham assassinated!"  cried all present, with one
Title:  voice.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said the baron, "assassinated.  On receiving the warning letter
Title:  you wrote to me, I had this woman arrested, and gave her in charge to a
Title:  loyal servant.  She corrupted this man; she placed the poniard in his
Title:  hand; she made him kill the duke.  And at this moment, perhaps, Felton
Title:  is paying with his head for the crime of this fury!"
Title:  
Title:  A shudder crept through the judges at the revelation of these unknown
Title:  crimes.
Title:  
Title:  "That is not all," resumed Lord de Winter.  "My brother, who made you
Title:  his heir, died in three hours of a strange disorder which left livid
Title:  traces all over the body.  My sister, how did your husband die?"
Title:  
Title:  "Horror!"  cried Porthos and Aramis.
Title:  
Title:  "Assassin of Buckingham, assassin of Felton, assassin of my brother, I
Title:  demand justice upon you, and I swear that if it be not granted to me, I
Title:  will execute it myself."
Title:  
Title:  And Lord de Winter ranged himself by the side of d'Artagnan, leaving the
Title:  place free for another accuser.
Title:  
Title:  Milady let her head sink between her two hands, and tried to recall her
Title:  ideas, whirling in a mortal vertigo.
Title:  
Title:  "My turn," said Athos, himself trembling as the lion trembles at the
Title:  sight of the serpent--"my turn.  I married that woman when she was a
Title:  young girl; I married her in opposition to the wishes of all my family;
Title:  I gave her my wealth, I gave her my name; and one day I discovered that
Title:  this woman was branded--this woman was marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS on her
Title:  left shoulder."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh," said Milady, raising herself, "I defy you to find any tribunal
Title:  which pronounced that infamous sentence against me.  I defy you to find
Title:  him who executed it."
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!"  said a hollow voice.  "It is for me to reply to that!"  And
Title:  the man in the red cloak came forward in his turn.
Title:  
Title:  "What man is that?  What man is that?"  cried Milady, suffocated by
Title:  terror, her hair loosening itself, and rising above her livid
Title:  countenance as if alive.
Title:  
Title:  All eyes were turned towards this man--for to all except Athos he was
Title:  unknown.
Title:  
Title:  Even Athos looked at him with as much stupefaction as the others, for he
Title:  knew not how he could in any way find himself mixed up with the horrible
Title:  drama then unfolded.
Title:  
Title:  After approaching Milady with a slow and solemn step, so that the table
Title:  alone separated them, the unknown took off his mask.
Title:  
Title:  Milady for some time examined with increasing terror that pale face,
Title:  framed with black hair and whiskers, the only expression of which was
Title:  icy impassibility.  Then she suddenly cried, "Oh, no, no!"  rising and
Title:  retreating to the very wall.  "No, no!  it is an infernal apparition!
Title:  It is not he!  Help, help!"  screamed she, turning towards the wall, as
Title:  if she would tear an opening with her hands.
Title:  
Title:  "Who are you, then?"  cried all the witnesses of this scene.
Title:  
Title:  "Ask that woman," said the man in the red cloak, "for you may plainly
Title:  see she knows me!"
Title:  
Title:  "The executioner of Lille, the executioner of Lille!"  cried Milady, a
Title:  prey to insensate terror, and clinging with her hands to the wall to
Title:  avoid falling.
Title:  
Title:  Every one drew back, and the man in the red cloak remained standing
Title:  alone in the middle of the room.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, grace, grace, pardon!" cried the wretch, falling on her knees.
Title:  
Title:  The unknown waited for silence, and then resumed, "I told you well that
Title:  she would know me.  Yes, I am the executioner of Lille, and this is my
Title:  history."
Title:  
Title:  All eyes were fixed upon this man, whose words were listened to with
Title:  anxious attention.
Title:  
Title:  "That woman was once a young girl, as beautiful as she is today.  She
Title:  was a nun in the convent of the Benedictines of Templemar.  A young
Title:  priest, with a simple and trustful heart, performed the duties of the
Title:  church of that convent.  She undertook his seduction, and succeeded; she
Title:  would have seduced a saint.
Title:  
Title:  "Their vows were sacred and irrevocable.  Their connection could not
Title:  last long without ruining both.  She prevailed upon him to leave the
Title:  country; but to leave the country, to fly together, to reach another
Title:  part of France, where they might live at ease because unknown, money was
Title:  necessary.  Neither had any.  The priest stole the sacred vases, and
Title:  sold them; but as they were preparing to escape together, they were both
Title:  arrested.
Title:  
Title:  "Eight days later she had seduced the son of the jailer, and escaped.
Title:  The young priest was condemned to ten years of imprisonment, and to be
Title:  branded.  I was executioner of the city of Lille, as this woman has
Title:  said.  I was obliged to brand the guilty one; and he, gentlemen, was my
Title:  brother!
Title:  
Title:  "I then swore that this woman who had ruined him, who was more than his
Title:  accomplice, since she had urged him to the crime, should at least share
Title:  his punishment.  I suspected where she was concealed.  I followed her, I
Title:  caught her, I bound her; and I imprinted the same disgraceful mark upon
Title:  her that I had imprinted upon my poor brother.
Title:  
Title:  "The day after my return to Lille, my brother in his turn succeeded in
Title:  making his escape; I was accused of complicity, and was condemned to
Title:  remain in his place till he should be again a prisoner.  My poor brother
Title:  was ignorant of this sentence.  He rejoined this woman; they fled
Title:  together into Berry, and there he obtained a little curacy.  This woman
Title:  passed for his sister.
Title:  
Title:  "The Lord of the estate on which the chapel of the curacy was situated
Title:  saw this pretend sister, and became enamoured of her--amorous to such a
Title:  degree that he proposed to marry her.  Then she quitted him she had
Title:  ruined for him she was destined to ruin, and became the Comtesse de la
Title:  Fere--"
Title:  
Title:  All eyes were turned towards Athos, whose real name that was, and who
Title:  made a sign with his head that all was true which the executioner had
Title:  said.
Title:  
Title:  "Then," resumed he, "mad, desperate, determined to get rid of an
Title:  existence from which she had stolen everything, honor and happiness, my
Title:  poor brother returned to Lille, and learning the sentence which had
Title:  condemned me in his place, surrendered himself, and hanged himself that
Title:  same night from the iron bar of the loophole of his prison.
Title:  
Title:  "To do justice to them who had condemned me, they kept their word.  As
Title:  soon as the identity of my brother was proved, I was set at liberty.
Title:  
Title:  "That is the crime of which I accuse her; that is the cause for which
Title:  she was branded."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur d'Artagnan," said Athos, "what is the penalty you demand
Title:  against this woman?"
Title:  
Title:  "The punishment of death," replied d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "My Lord de Winter," continued Athos, "what is the penalty you demand
Title:  against this woman?"
Title:  
Title:  "The punishment of death," replied Lord de Winter.
Title:  
Title:  "Messieurs Porthos and Aramis," repeated Athos, "you who are her judges,
Title:  what is the sentence you pronounce upon this woman?"
Title:  
Title:  "The punishment of death," replied the Musketeers, in a hollow voice.
Title:  
Title:  Milady uttered a frightful shriek, and dragged herself along several
Title:  paces upon her knees toward her judges.
Title:  
Title:  Athos stretched out his hand toward her.
Title:  
Title:  "Charlotte Backson, Comtesse de la Fere, Milady de Winter," said he,
Title:  "your crimes have wearied men on earth and God in heaven.  If you know a
Title:  prayer, say it--for you are condemned, and you shall die."
Title:  
Title:  At these words, which left no hope, Milady raised herself in all her
Title:  pride, and wished to speak; but her strength failed her.  She felt that
Title:  a powerful and implacable hand seized her by the hair, and dragged her
Title:  away as irrevocably as fatality drags humanity.  She did not, therefore,
Title:  even attempt the least resistance, and went out of the cottage.
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter, d'Artagnan, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, went out close
Title:  behind her.  The lackeys followed their masters, and the chamber was
Title:  left solitary, with its broken window, its open door, and its smoky lamp
Title:  burning sadly on the table.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  66  EXECUTION
Title:  
Title:  It was near midnight; the moon, lessened by its decline, and reddened by
Title:  the last traces of the storm, arose behind the little town of
Title:  Armentieres, which showed against its pale light the dark outline of its
Title:  houses, and the skeleton of its high belfry.  In front of them the Lys
Title:  rolled its waters like a river of molten tin; while on the other side
Title:  was a black mass of trees, profiled on a stormy sky, invaded by large
Title:  coppery clouds which created a sort of twilight amid the night.  On the
Title:  left was an old abandoned mill, with its motionless wings, from the
Title:  ruins of which an owl threw out its shrill, periodical, and monotonous
Title:  cry.  On the right and on the left of the road, which the dismal
Title:  procession pursued, appeared a few low, stunted trees, which looked like
Title:  deformed dwarfs crouching down to watch men traveling at this sinister
Title:  hour.
Title:  
Title:  From time to time a broad sheet of lightning opened the horizon in its
Title:  whole width, darted like a serpent over the black mass of trees, and
Title:  like a terrible scimitar divided the heavens and the waters into two
Title:  parts.  Not a breath of wind now disturbed the heavy atmosphere.  A
Title:  deathlike silence oppressed all nature.  The soil was humid and
Title:  glittering with the rain which had recently fallen, and the refreshed
Title:  herbs sent forth their perfume with additional energy.
Title:  
Title:  Two lackeys dragged Milady, whom each held by one arm.  The executioner
Title:  walked behind them, and Lord de Winter, d'Artagnan, Porthos, and Aramis
Title:  walked behind the executioner.  Planchet and Bazin came last.
Title:  
Title:  The two lackeys conducted Milady to the bank of the river.  Her mouth
Title:  was mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence,
Title:  supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.
Title:  
Title:  Being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, "A thousand
Title:  pistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if you
Title:  deliver me up to your masters, I have near at hand avengers who will
Title:  make you pay dearly for my death."
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud hesitated.  Mousqueton trembled in all his members.
Title:  
Title:  Athos, who heard Milady's voice, came sharply up.  Lord de Winter did
Title:  the same.
Title:  
Title:  "Change these lackeys," said he; "she has spoken to them.  They are no
Title:  longer sure."
Title:  
Title:  Planchet and Bazin were called, and took the places of Grimaud and
Title:  Mousqueton.
Title:  
Title:  On the bank of the river the executioner approached Milady, and bound
Title:  her hands and feet.
Title:  
Title:  Then she broke the silence to cry out, "You are cowards, miserable
Title:  assassins--ten men combined to murder one woman.  Beware!  If I am not
Title:  saved I shall be avenged."
Title:  
Title:  "You are not a woman," said Athos, coldly and sternly.  "You do not
Title:  belong to the human species; you are a demon escaped from hell, whither
Title:  we send you back again."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, you virtuous men!"  said Milady; "please to remember that he who
Title:  shall touch a hair of my head is himself an assassin."
Title:  
Title:  "The executioner may kill, without being on that account an assassin,"
Title:  said the man in the red cloak, rapping upon his immense sword.  "This is
Title:  the last judge; that is all.  NACHRICHTER, as say our neighbors, the
Title:  Germans."
Title:  
Title:  And as he bound her while saying these words, Milady uttered two or
Title:  three savage cries, which produced a strange and melancholy effect in
Title:  flying away into the night, and losing themselves in the depths of the
Title:  woods.
Title:  
Title:  "If I am guilty, if I have committed the crimes you accuse me of,"
Title:  shrieked Milady, "take me before a tribunal.  You are not judges!  You
Title:  cannot condemn me!"
Title:  
Title:  "I offered you Tyburn," said Lord de Winter.  "Why did you not accept
Title:  it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Because I am not willing to die!"  cried Milady, struggling.  "Because
Title:  I am too young to die!"
Title:  
Title:  "The woman you poisoned at Bethune was still younger than you, madame,
Title:  and yet she is dead," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I will enter a cloister; I will become a nun," said Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "You were in a cloister," said the executioner, "and you left it to ruin
Title:  my brother."
Title:  
Title:  Milady uttered a cry of terror and sank upon her knees.  The executioner
Title:  took her up in his arms and was carrying her toward the boat.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my God!"  cried she, "my God!  are you going to drown me?"
Title:  
Title:  These cries had something so heartrending in them that M. d'Artagnan,
Title:  who had been at first the most eager in pursuit of Milady, sat down on
Title:  the stump of a tree and hung his head, covering his ears with the palms
Title:  of his hands; and yet, notwithstanding, he could still hear her cry and
Title:  threaten.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan was the youngest of all these men.  His heart failed him.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I cannot behold this frightful spectacle!"  said he.  "I cannot
Title:  consent that this woman should die thus!"
Title:  
Title:  Milady heard these few words and caught at a shadow of hope.
Title:  
Title:  "d'Artagnan, d'Artagnan!"  cried she; "remember that I loved you!"
Title:  
Title:  The young man rose and took a step toward her.
Title:  
Title:  But Athos rose likewise, drew his sword, and placed himself in the way.
Title:  
Title:  "If you take one step farther, d'Artagnan," said he, "we shall cross
Title:  swords together."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan sank on his knees and prayed.
Title:  
Title:  "Come," continued Athos, "executioner, do your duty."
Title:  
Title:  "Willingly, monseigneur," said the executioner; "for as I am a good
Title:  Catholic, I firmly believe I am acting justly in performing my functions
Title:  on this woman."
Title:  
Title:  "That's well."
Title:  
Title:  Athos made a step toward Milady.
Title:  
Title:  "I pardon you," said he, "the ill you have done me.  I pardon you for my
Title:  blasted future, my lost honor, my defiled love, and my salvation forever
Title:  compromised by the despair into which you have cast me.  Die in peace!"
Title:  
Title:  Lord de Winter advanced in his turn.
Title:  
Title:  "I pardon you," said he, "for the poisoning of my brother, and the
Title:  assassination of his Grace, Lord Buckingham.  I pardon you for the death
Title:  of poor Felton; I pardon you for the attempts upon my own person.  Die
Title:  in peace!"
Title:  
Title:  "And I," said M. d'Artagnan.  "Pardon me, madame, for having by a trick
Title:  unworthy of a gentleman provoked your anger; and I, in exchange, pardon
Title:  you the murder of my poor love and your cruel vengeance against me.  I
Title:  pardon you, and I weep for you.  Die in peace!"
Title:  
Title:  "I am lost!"  murmured Milady in English.  "I must die!"
Title:  
Title:  Then she arose of herself, and cast around her one of those piercing
Title:  looks which seemed to dart from an eye of flame.
Title:  
Title:  She saw nothing; she listened, and she heard nothing.
Title:  
Title:  "Where am I to die?" said she.
Title:  
Title:  "On the other bank," replied the executioner.
Title:  
Title:  Then he placed her in the boat, and as he was going to set foot in it
Title:  himself, Athos handed him a sum of silver.
Title:  
Title:  "Here," said he, "is the price of the execution, that it may be plain we
Title:  act as judges."
Title:  
Title:  "That is correct," said the executioner; "and now in her turn, let this
Title:  woman see that I am not fulfilling my trade, but my debt."
Title:  
Title:  And he threw the money into the river.
Title:  
Title:  The boat moved off toward the left-hand shore of the Lys, bearing the
Title:  guilty woman and the executioner; all the others remained on the right-
Title:  hand bank, where they fell on their knees.
Title:  
Title:  The boat glided along the ferry rope under the shadow of a pale cloud
Title:  which hung over the water at that moment.
Title:  
Title:  The troop of friends saw it gain the opposite bank; the figures were
Title:  defined like black shadows on the red-tinted horizon.
Title:  
Title:  Milady, during the passage had contrived to untie the cord which
Title:  fastened her feet.  On coming near the bank, she jumped lightly on shore
Title:  and took to flight.  But the soil was moist; on reaching the top of the
Title:  bank, she slipped and fell upon her knees.
Title:  
Title:  She was struck, no doubt, with a superstitious idea; she conceived that
Title:  heaven denied its aid, and she remained in the attitude in which she had
Title:  fallen, her head drooping and her hands clasped.
Title:  
Title:  Then they saw from the other bank the executioner raise both his arms
Title:  slowly; a moonbeam fell upon the blade of the large sword.  The two
Title:  arms fell with a sudden force; they heard the hissing of the scimitar
Title:  and the cry of the victim, then a truncated mass sank beneath the blow.
Title:  
Title:  The executioner then took off his red cloak, spread it upon the ground,
Title:  laid the body in it, threw in the head, tied all up by the four corners,
Title:  lifted it on his back, and entered the boat again.
Title:  
Title:  In the middle of the stream he stopped the boat, and suspending his
Title:  burden over the water cried in a loud voice, "Let the justice of God be
Title:  done!"  and he let the corpse drop into the depths of the waters, which
Title:  closed over it.
Title:  
Title:  Three days afterward the four Musketeers were in Paris; they had not
Title:  exceeded their leave of absence, and that same evening they went to pay
Title:  their customary visit to M. de Treville.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, gentlemen," said the brave captain, "I hope you have been well
Title:  amused during your excursion."
Title:  
Title:  "Prodigiously," replied Athos in the name of himself and his comrades.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  67 CONCLUSION
Title:  
Title:  On the sixth of the following month the king, in compliance with the
Title:  promise he had made the cardinal to return to La Rochelle, left his
Title:  capital still in amazement at the news which began to spread itself of
Title:  Buckingham's assassination.
Title:  
Title:  Although warned that the man she had loved so much was in great danger,
Title:  the queen, when his death was announced to her, would not believe the
Title:  fact, and even imprudently exclaimed, "it is false; he has just written
Title:  to me!"
Title:  
Title:  But the next day she was obliged to believe this fatal intelligence;
Title:  Laporte, detained in England, as everyone else had been, by the orders
Title:  of Charles I, arrived, and was the bearer of the duke's dying gift to
Title:  the queen.
Title:  
Title:  The joy of the king was lively.  He did not even give himself the
Title:  trouble to dissemble, and displayed it with affectation before the
Title:  queen.  Louis XIII, like every weak mind, was wanting in generosity.
Title:  
Title:  But the king soon again became dull and indisposed; his brow was not one
Title:  of those that long remain clear.  He felt that in returning to camp he
Title:  should re-enter slavery; nevertheless, he did return.
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal was for him the fascinating serpent, and himself the bird
Title:  which flies from branch to branch without power to escape.
Title:  
Title:  The return to La Rochelle, therefore, was profoundly dull.  Our four
Title:  friends, in particular, astonished their comrades; they traveled
Title:  together, side by side, with sad eyes and heads lowered.  Athos alone
Title:  from time to time raised his expansive brow; a flash kindled in his
Title:  eyes, and a bitter smile passed over his lips, then, like his comrades,
Title:  he sank again into reverie.
Title:  
Title:  As soon as the escort arrived in a city, when they had conducted the
Title:  king to his quarters the four friends either retired to their own or to
Title:  some secluded cabaret, where they neither drank nor played; they only
Title:  conversed in a low voice, looking around attentively to see that no one
Title:  overheard them.
Title:  
Title:  One day, when the king had halted to fly the magpie, and the four
Title:  friends, according to their custom, instead of following the sport had
Title:  stopped at a cabaret on the high road, a man coming from la Rochelle on
Title:  horseback pulled up at the door to drink a glass of wine, and darted a
Title:  searching glance into the room where the four Musketeers were sitting.
Title:  
Title:  "Holloa, Monsieur d'Artagnan!"  said he, "is not that you whom I see
Title:  yonder?"
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan raised his head and uttered a cry of joy.  It was the man he
Title:  called his phantom; it was his stranger of Meung, of the Rue des
Title:  Fossoyeurs and of Arras.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan drew his sword, and sprang toward the door.
Title:  
Title:  But this time, instead of avoiding him the stranger jumped from his
Title:  horse, and advanced to meet d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, monsieur!"  said the young man, "I meet you, then, at last!  This
Title:  time you shall not escape me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Neither is it my intention, monsieur, for this time I was seeking you;
Title:  in the name of the king, I arrest you."
Title:  
Title:  "How!  what do you say?"  cried d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "I say that you must surrender your sword to me, monsieur, and that
Title:  without resistance.  This concerns your head, I warn you."
Title:  
Title:  "Who are you, then?"  demanded d'Artagnan, lowering the point of his
Title:  sword, but without yet surrendering it.
Title:  
Title:  "I am the Chevalier de Rochefort," answered the other, "the equerry of
Title:  Monsieur le Cardinal Richelieu, and I have orders to conduct you to his
Title:  Eminence."
Title:  
Title:  "We are returning to his Eminence, monsieur the Chevalier," said Athos,
Title:  advancing; "and you will please to accept the word of Monsieur
Title:  d'Artagnan that he will go straight to La Rochelle."
Title:  
Title:  "I must place him in the hands of guards who will take him into camp."
Title:  
Title:  "We will be his guards, monsieur, upon our word as gentlemen; but
Title:  likewise, upon our word as gentlemen," added Athos, knitting his brow,
Title:  "Monsieur d'Artagnan shall not leave us."
Title:  
Title:  The Chevalier de Rochefort cast a glance backward, and saw that Porthos
Title:  and Aramis had placed themselves between him and the gate; he understood
Title:  that he was completely at the mercy of these four men.
Title:  
Title:  "Gentlemen," said he, "if Monsieur d'Artagnan will surrender his sword
Title:  to me and join his word to yours, I shall be satisfied with your promise
Title:  to convey Monsieur d'Artagnan to the quarters of Monseigneur the
Title:  Cardinal."
Title:  
Title:  "You have my word, monsieur, and here is my sword."
Title:  
Title:  "This suits me the better," said Rochefort, "as I wish to continue my
Title:  journey."
Title:  
Title:  "If it is for the purpose of rejoining Milady," said Athos, coolly, "it
Title:  is useless; you will not find her."
Title:  
Title:  "What has become of her, then?"  asked Rochefort, eagerly.
Title:  
Title:  "Return to camp and you shall know."
Title:  
Title:  Rochefort remained for a moment in thought; then, as they were only a
Title:  day's journey from Surgeres, whither the cardinal was to come to meet
Title:  the king, he resolved to follow the advice of Athos and go with them.
Title:  Besides, this return offered him the advantage of watching his prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  They resumed their route.
Title:  
Title:  On the morrow, at three o'clock in the afternoon, they arrived at
Title:  Surgeres.  The cardinal there awaited Louis XIII.  The minister and the
Title:  king exchanged numerous caresses, felicitating each other upon the
Title:  fortunate chance which had freed France from the inveterate enemy who
Title:  set all Europe against her.  After which, the cardinal, who had been
Title:  informed that d'Artagnan was arrested and who was anxious to see him,
Title:  took leave of the king, inviting him to come the next day to view the
Title:  work already done upon the dyke.
Title:  
Title:  On returning in the evening to his quarters at the bridge of La Pierre,
Title:  the cardinal found, standing before the house he occupied, d'Artagnan,
Title:  without his sword, and the three Musketeers armed.
Title:  
Title:  This time, as he was well attended, he looked at them sternly, and made
Title:  a sign with his eye and hand for d'Artagnan to follow him.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan obeyed.
Title:  
Title:  "We shall wait for you, d'Artagnan," said Athos, loud enough for the
Title:  cardinal to hear him.
Title:  
Title:  His Eminence bent his brow, stopped for an instant, and then kept on his
Title:  way without uttering a single word.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan entered after the cardinal, and behind d'Artagnan the door
Title:  was guarded.
Title:  
Title:  His Eminence entered the chamber which served him as a study, and made a
Title:  sign to Rochefort to bring in the young Musketeer.
Title:  
Title:  Rochefort obeyed and retired.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan remained alone in front of the cardinal; this was his second
Title:  interview with Richelieu, and he afterward confessed that he felt well
Title:  assured it would be his last.
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu remained standing, leaning against the mantelpiece; a table
Title:  was between him and d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said the cardinal, "you have been arrested by my orders."
Title:  
Title:  "So they tell me, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "Do you know why?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, monseigneur, for the only thing for which I could be arrested is
Title:  still unknown to your Eminence."
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu looked steadfastly at the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Holloa!"  said he, "what does that mean?"
Title:  
Title:  "If Monseigneur will have the goodness to tell me, in the first place,
Title:  what crimes are imputed to me, I will then tell him the deeds I have
Title:  really done."
Title:  
Title:  "Crimes are imputed to you which had brought down far loftier heads than
Title:  yours, monsieur," said the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "What, monseigneur?"  said d'Artagnan, with a calmness which astonished
Title:  the cardinal himself.
Title:  
Title:  "You are charged with having corresponded with the enemies of the
Title:  kingdom; you are charged with having surprised state secrets; you are
Title:  charged with having tried to thwart the plans of your general."
Title:  
Title:  "And who charges me with this, monseigneur?"  said d'Artagnan, who had
Title:  no doubt the accusation came from Milady, "a woman branded by the
Title:  justice of the country; a woman who has espoused one man in France and
Title:  another in England; a woman who poisoned her second husband and who
Title:  attempted both to poison and assassinate me!"
Title:  
Title:  "What do you say, monsieur?"  cried the cardinal, astonished; "and of
Title:  what woman are you speaking thus?"
Title:  
Title:  "Of Milady de Winter," replied d'Artagnan, "yes, of Milady de Winter, of
Title:  whose crimes your Eminence is doubtless ignorant, since you have honored
Title:  her with your confidence."
Title:  
Title:  "Monsieur," said the cardinal, "if Milady de Winter has committed the
Title:  crimes you lay to her charge, she shall be punished."
Title:  
Title:  "She has been punished, monseigneur."
Title:  
Title:  "And who has punished her?"
Title:  
Title:  "We."
Title:  
Title:  "She is in prison?"
Title:  
Title:  "She is dead."
Title:  
Title:  "Dead!" repeated the cardinal, who could not believe what he heard,
Title:  "dead!  Did you not say she was dead?"
Title:  
Title:  "Three times she attempted to kill me, and I pardoned her; but she
Title:  murdered the woman I loved.  Then my friends and I took her, tried her,
Title:  and condemned her."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan then related the poisoning of Mme. Bonacieux in the convent
Title:  of the Carmelites at Bethune, the trial in the isolated house, and the
Title:  execution on the banks of the Lys.
Title:  
Title:  A shudder crept through the body of the cardinal, who did not shudder
Title:  readily.
Title:  
Title:  But all at once, as if undergoing the influence of an unspoken thought,
Title:  the countenance of the cardinal, till then gloomy, cleared up by
Title:  degrees, and recovered perfect serenity.
Title:  
Title:  "So," said the cardinal, in a tone that contrasted strongly with the
Title:  severity of his words, "you have constituted yourselves judges, without
Title:  remembering that they who punish without license to punish are
Title:  assassins?"
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur, I swear to you that I never for an instant had the
Title:  intention of defending my head against you.  I willingly submit to any
Title:  punishment your Eminence may please to inflict upon me.  I do not hold
Title:  life dear enough to be afraid of death."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I know you are a man of a stout heart, monsieur," said the
Title:  cardinal, with a voice almost affectionate; "I can therefore tell you
Title:  beforehand you shall be tried, and even condemned."
Title:  
Title:  "Another might reply to your Eminence that he had his pardon in his
Title:  pocket.  I content myself with saying:  Command, monseigneur; I am
Title:  ready."
Title:  
Title:  "Your pardon?" said Richelieu, surprised.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, monseigneur," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "And signed by whom--by the king?"  And the cardinal pronounced these
Title:  words with a singular expression of contempt.
Title:  
Title:  "No, by your Eminence."
Title:  
Title:  "By me?  You are insane, monsieur."
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur will doubtless recognize his own handwriting."
Title:  
Title:  And d'Artagnan presented to the cardinal the precious piece of paper
Title:  which Athos had forced from Milady, and which he had given to d'Artagnan
Title:  to serve him as a safeguard.
Title:  
Title:  His Eminence took the paper, and read in a slow voice, dwelling upon
Title:  every syllable:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Dec. 3, 1627
Title:  
Title:  "It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this
Title:  has done what he has done.
Title:  
Title:  "RICHELIEU"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal, after having read these two lines, sank into a profound
Title:  reverie; but he did not return the paper to d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "He is meditating by what sort of punishment he shall cause me to die,"
Title:  said the Gascon to himself.  "Well, my faith!  he shall see how a
Title:  gentleman can die."
Title:  
Title:  The young Musketeer was in excellent disposition to die heroically.
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu still continued thinking, rolling and unrolling the paper in
Title:  his hands.
Title:  
Title:  At length he raised his head, fixed his eagle look upon that loyal,
Title:  open, and intelligent countenance, read upon that face, furrowed with
Title:  tears, all the sufferings its possessor had endured in the course of a
Title:  month, and reflected for the third or fourth time how much there was in
Title:  that youth of twenty-one years before him, and what resources his
Title:  activity, his courage, and his shrewdness might offer to a good master.
Title:  On the other side, the crimes, the power, and the infernal genius of
Title:  Milady had more than once terrified him.  He felt something like a
Title:  secret joy at being forever relieved of this dangerous accomplice.
Title:  
Title:  Richelieu slowly tore the paper which d'Artagnan had generously
Title:  relinquished.
Title:  
Title:  "I am lost!"  said d'Artagnan to himself.  And he bowed profoundly
Title:  before the cardinal, like a man who says, "Lord, Thy will be done!"
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal approached the table, and without sitting down, wrote a few
Title:  lines upon a parchment of which two-thirds were already filled, and
Title:  affixed his seal.
Title:  
Title:  "That is my condemnation," thought d'Artagnan; "he will spare me the
Title:  ENNUI of the Bastille, or the tediousness of a trial.  That's very kind
Title:  of him."
Title:  
Title:  "Here, monsieur," said the cardinal to the young man.  "I have taken
Title:  from you one CARTE BLANCHE to give you another.  The name is wanting in
Title:  this commission; you can write it yourself."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took the paper hesitatingly and cast his eyes over it; it was
Title:  a lieutenant's commission in the Musketeers.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan fell at the feet of the cardinal.
Title:  
Title:  "Monseigneur," said he, "my life is yours; henceforth dispose of it.
Title:  But this favor which you bestow upon me I do not merit.  I have three
Title:  friends who are more meritorious and more worthy--"
Title:  
Title:  "You are a brave youth, d'Artagnan," interrupted the cardinal, tapping
Title:  him familiarly on the shoulder, charmed at having vanquished this
Title:  rebellious nature.  "Do with this commission what you will; only
Title:  remember, though the name be blank, it is to you I give it."
Title:  
Title:  "I shall never forget it," replied d'Artagnan.  "Your Eminence may be
Title:  certain of that."
Title:  
Title:  The cardinal turned and said in a loud voice, "Rochefort!"  The
Title:  chevalier, who no doubt was near the door, entered immediately.
Title:  
Title:  "Rochefort," said the cardinal, "you see Monsieur d'Artagnan.  I receive
Title:  him among the number of my friends.  Greet each other, then; and be wise
Title:  if you wish to preserve your heads."
Title:  
Title:  Rochefort and d'Artagnan coolly greeted each other with their lips; but
Title:  the cardinal was there, observing them with his vigilant eye.
Title:  
Title:  They left the chamber at the same time.
Title:  
Title:  "We shall meet again, shall we not, monsieur?"
Title:  
Title:  "When you please," said d'Artagnan.
Title:  
Title:  "An opportunity will come," replied Rochefort.
Title:  
Title:  "Hey?"  said the cardinal, opening the door.
Title:  
Title:  The two men smiled at each other, shook hands, and saluted his Eminence.
Title:  
Title:  "We were beginning to grow impatient," said Athos.
Title:  
Title:  "Here I am, my friends," replied d'Artagnan; "not only free, but in
Title:  favor."
Title:  
Title:  "Tell us about it."
Title:  
Title:  "This evening; but for the moment, let us separate."
Title:  
Title:  Accordingly, that same evening d'Artagnan repaired to the quarters of
Title:  Athos, whom he found in a fair way to empty a bottle of Spanish wine--an
Title:  occupation which he religiously accomplished every night.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan related what had taken place between the cardinal and
Title:  himself, and drawing the commission from his pocket, said, "Here, my
Title:  dear Athos, this naturally belongs to you."
Title:  
Title:  Athos smiled with one of his sweet and expressive smiles.
Title:  
Title:  "Friend," said he, "for Athos this is too much; for the Comte de la Fere
Title:  it is too little.  Keep the commission; it is yours.  Alas!  you have
Title:  purchased it dearly enough."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan left Athos's chamber and went to that of Porthos.  He found
Title:  him clothed in a magnificent dress covered with splendid embroidery,
Title:  admiring himself before a glass.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, ah!  is that you, dear friend?"  exclaimed Porthos.  "How do you
Title:  think these garments fit me?"
Title:  
Title:  "Wonderfully," said d'Artagnan; but I come to offer you a dress which
Title:  will become you still better."
Title:  
Title:  "What?"  asked Porthos.
Title:  
Title:  "That of a lieutenant of Musketeers."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan related to Porthos the substance of his interview with the
Title:  cardinal, and said, taking the commission from his pocket, "Here, my
Title:  friend, write your name upon it and become my chief."
Title:  
Title:  Porthos cast his eyes over the commission and returned it to d'Artagnan,
Title:  to the great astonishment of the young man.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said he, "yes, that would flatter me very much; but I should not
Title:  have time enough to enjoy the distinction.  During our expedition to
Title:  Bethune the husband of my duchess died; so, my dear, the coffer of the
Title:  defunct holding out its arms to me, I shall marry the widow.  Look here!
Title:  I was trying on my wedding suit.  Keep the lieutenancy, my dear, keep
Title:  it."
Title:  
Title:  The young man then entered the apartment of Aramis.  He found him
Title:  kneeling before a PRIEDIEU with his head leaning on an open prayer book.
Title:  
Title:  He described to him his interview with the cardinal, and said, for the
Title:  third time drawing his commission from his pocket, "You, our friend, our
Title:  intelligence, our invisible protector, accept this commission.  You have
Title:  merited it more than any of us by your wisdom and your counsels, always
Title:  followed by such happy results."
Title:  
Title:  "Alas, dear friend!"  said Aramis, "our late adventures have disgusted
Title:  me with military life.  This time my determination is irrevocably taken.
Title:  After the siege I shall enter the house of the Lazarists.  Keep the
Title:  commission, d'Artagnan; the profession of arms suits you.  You will be a
Title:  brave and adventurous captain."
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan, his eye moist with gratitude though beaming with joy, went
Title:  back to Athos, whom he found still at table contemplating the charms of
Title:  his last glass of Malaga by the light of his lamp.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said he, "they likewise have refused me."
Title:  
Title:  "That, dear friend, is because nobody is more worthy than yourself."
Title:  
Title:  He took a quill, wrote the name of d'Artagnan in the commission, and
Title:  returned it to him.
Title:  
Title:  "I shall then have no more friends," said the young man.  "Alas!
Title:  nothing but bitter recollections."
Title:  
Title:  And he let his head sink upon his hands, while two large tears rolled
Title:  down his cheeks.
Title:  
Title:  "You are young," replied Athos; "and your bitter recollections have time
Title:  to change themselves into sweet remembrances."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  EPILOGUE
Title:  
Title:  La Rochelle, deprived of the assistance of the English fleet and of the
Title:  diversion promised by Buckingham, surrendered after a siege of a year.
Title:  On the twenty-eighth of October, 1628, the capitulation was signed.
Title:  
Title:  The king made his entrance into Paris on the twenty-third of December of
Title:  the same year.  He was received in triumph, as if he came from
Title:  conquering an enemy and not Frenchmen.  He entered by the Faubourg St.
Title:  Jacques, under verdant arches.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan took possession of his command.  Porthos left the service,
Title:  and in the course of the following year married Mme. Coquenard; the
Title:  coffer so much coveted contained eight hundred thousand livres.
Title:  
Title:  Mousqueton had a magnificent livery, and enjoyed the satisfaction of
Title:  which he had been ambitious all his life--that of standing behind a
Title:  gilded carriage.
Title:  
Title:  Aramis, after a journey into Lorraine, disappeared all at once, and
Title:  ceased to write to his friends; they learned at a later period through
Title:  Mme. de Chevreuse, who told it to two or three of her intimates, that,
Title:  yielding to his vocation, he had retired into a convent--only into
Title:  which, nobody knew.
Title:  
Title:  Bazin became a lay brother.
Title:  
Title:  Athos remained a Musketeer under the command of d'Artagnan till the year
Title:  1633, at which period, after a journey he made to Touraine, he also quit
Title:  the service, under the pretext of having inherited a small property in
Title:  Roussillon.
Title:  
Title:  Grimaud followed Athos.
Title:  
Title:  D'Artagnan fought three times with Rochefort, and wounded him three
Title:  times.
Title:  
Title:  "I shall probably kill you the fourth," said he to him, holding out his
Title:  hand to assist him to rise.
Title:  
Title:  "It is much better both for you and for me to stop where we are,"
Title:  answered the wounded man.  "CORBLEU--I am more your friend than you
Title:  think--for after our very first encounter, I could by saying a word to
Title:  the cardinal have had your throat cut!"
Title:  
Title:  They this time embraced heartily, and without retaining any malice.
Title:  
Title:  Planchet obtained from Rochefort the rank of sergeant in the Piedmont
Title:  regiment.
Title:  
Title:  M. Bonacieux lived on very quietly, wholly ignorant of what had become
Title:  of his wife, and caring very little about it.  One day he had the
Title:  imprudence to recall himself to the memory of the cardinal.  The
Title:  cardinal had him informed that he would provide for him so that he
Title:  should never want for anything in future.  In fact, M. Bonacieux,
Title:  having left his house at seven o'clock in the evening to go to the
Title:  Louvre, never appeared again in the Rue des Fossoyeurs; the opinion
Title:  of those who seemed to be best informed was that he was fed and
Title:  lodged in some royal castle, at the expense of his generous Eminence.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  End of Project Gutenberg's The Three Musketeers, by Alexandre Dumas [Pere]
Title:  
Title:  *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THREE MUSKETEERS ***
Title:  
Title:  This file should be named 1musk12.txt or 1musk12.zip
Title:  Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 1musk11.txt
Title:  VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 1musk10a.txt
Title:  
Title:  Typed By:
Title:  John P. Roberts III
Title:  Roger Labbe
Title:  Scott David Gray
Title:  Sue Asscher
Title:  Anita Martin
Title:  
Title:  Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
Title:  editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
Title:  unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
Title:  keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Title:  
Title:  We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
Title:  of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Title:  Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
Title:  even years after the official publication date.
Title:  
Title:  Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
Title:  midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
Title:  The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Title:  Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
Title:  preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
Title:  and editing by those who wish to do so.
Title:  
Title:  Most people start at our Web sites at:
Title:  http://gutenberg.net or
Title:  http://promo.net/pg
Title:  
Title:  These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Title:  Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
Title:  eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
Title:  can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
Title:  also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
Title:  indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
Title:  announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.
Title:  
Title:  http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
Title:  ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03
Title:  
Title:  Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90
Title:  
Title:  Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
Title:  as it appears in our Newsletters.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)
Title:  
Title:  We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
Title:  time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
Title:  to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
Title:  searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
Title:  projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
Title:  per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
Title:  million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
Title:  files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
Title:  We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
Title:  If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
Title:  will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.
Title:  
Title:  The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
Title:  This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
Title:  which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.
Title:  
Title:  Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):
Title:  
Title:  eBooks Year Month
Title:  
Title:      1  1971 July
Title:     10  1991 January
Title:    100  1994 January
Title:   1000  1997 August
Title:   1500  1998 October
Title:   2000  1999 December
Title:   2500  2000 December
Title:   3000  2001 November
Title:   4000  2001 October/November
Title:   6000  2002 December*
Title:   9000  2003 November*
Title:  10000  2004 January*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
Title:  to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.
Title:  
Title:  We need your donations more than ever!
Title:  
Title:  As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
Title:  and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Title:  Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Title:  Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Title:  Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Title:  Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Title:  Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Title:  Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Title:  Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
Title:  
Title:  We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
Title:  that have responded.
Title:  
Title:  As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
Title:  will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Title:  Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.
Title:  
Title:  In answer to various questions we have received on this:
Title:  
Title:  We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
Title:  request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
Title:  you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
Title:  just ask.
Title:  
Title:  While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
Title:  not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
Title:  donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
Title:  donate.
Title:  
Title:  International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
Title:  how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
Title:  deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
Title:  ways.
Title:  
Title:  Donations by check or money order may be sent to:
Title:  
Title:  Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
Title:  PMB 113
Title:  1739 University Ave.
Title:  Oxford, MS 38655-4109
Title:  
Title:  Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
Title:  method other than by check or money order.
Title:  
Title:  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
Title:  the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
Title:  [Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
Title:  tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
Title:  requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
Title:  made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.
Title:  
Title:  We need your donations more than ever!
Title:  
Title:  You can get up to date donation information online at:
Title:  
Title:  http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  ***
Title:  
Title:  If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
Title:  you can always email directly to:
Title:  
Title:  Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
Title:  
Title:  Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.
Title:  
Title:  We would prefer to send you information by email.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  **The Legal Small Print**
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  (Three Pages)
Title:  
Title:  ***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Title:  Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
Title:  They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
Title:  your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
Title:  someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
Title:  fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
Title:  disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
Title:  you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.
Title:  
Title:  *BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
Title:  By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
Title:  eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
Title:  this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
Title:  a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
Title:  sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
Title:  you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
Title:  medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.
Title:  
Title:  ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
Title:  This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
Title:  is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
Title:  through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Title:  Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
Title:  on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
Title:  distribute it in the United States without permission and
Title:  without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
Title:  below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
Title:  under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.
Title:  
Title:  Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
Title:  any commercial products without permission.
Title:  
Title:  To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
Title:  efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
Title:  works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
Title:  medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
Title:  things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
Title:  corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
Title:  intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
Title:  disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
Title:  codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
Title:  
Title:  LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
Title:  But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
Title:  [1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
Title:  receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
Title:  all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
Title:  legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
Title:  UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
Title:  INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
Title:  OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
Title:  POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
Title:  
Title:  If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
Title:  receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
Title:  you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
Title:  time to the person you received it from. If you received it
Title:  on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
Title:  such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
Title:  copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
Title:  choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
Title:  receive it electronically.
Title:  
Title:  THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
Title:  WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
Title:  TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
Title:  LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
Title:  PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
Title:  
Title:  Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
Title:  the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
Title:  above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
Title:  may have other legal rights.
Title:  
Title:  INDEMNITY
Title:  You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
Title:  and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
Title:  with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
Title:  texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
Title:  legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
Title:  following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
Title:  [2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
Title:  or [3] any Defect.
Title:  
Title:  DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
Title:  You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
Title:  disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
Title:  "Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
Title:  or:
Title:  
Title:  [1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
Title:       requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
Title:       eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
Title:       if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
Title:       binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
Title:       including any form resulting from conversion by word
Title:       processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
Title:       *EITHER*:
Title:  
Title:       [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
Title:            does *not* contain characters other than those
Title:            intended by the author of the work, although tilde
Title:            (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
Title:            be used to convey punctuation intended by the
Title:            author, and additional characters may be used to
Title:            indicate hypertext links; OR
Title:  
Title:       [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
Title:            no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
Title:            form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
Title:            the case, for instance, with most word processors);
Title:            OR
Title:  
Title:       [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
Title:            no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
Title:            eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
Title:            or other equivalent proprietary form).
Title:  
Title:  [2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
Title:       "Small Print!" statement.
Title:  
Title:  [3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
Title:       gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
Title:       already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
Title:       don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
Title:       payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
Title:       the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
Title:       legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
Title:       periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
Title:       let us know your plans and to work out the details.
Title:  
Title:  WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Title:  Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
Title:  public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
Title:  in machine readable form.
Title:  
Title:  The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
Title:  public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Title:  Money should be paid to the:
Title:  "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
Title:  
Title:  If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
Title:  software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
Title:  hart@pobox.com
Title:  
Title:  [Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
Title:  when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Title:  Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
Title:  used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
Title:  they hardware or software or any other related product without
Title:  express permission.]
Title:  
Title:  *END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
Title:  
