Title:  The Last of the Mohicans
Title:  
Title:  James Fenimore Cooper
Title:  
Title:  Author's Introduction
Title:  
Title:  It is believed that the scene of this tale, and most of the information
Title:  necessary to understand its allusions, are rendered sufficiently obvious to
Title:  the reader in the text itself, or in the accompanying notes. Still there is
Title:  so much obscurity in the Indian traditions, and so much confusion in the
Title:  Indian names, as to render some explanation useful.
Title:  
Title:  Few men exhibit greater diversity, or, if we may so express it, greater
Title:  antithesis of character, than the native warrior of North America. In war,
Title:  he is daring, boastful, cunning, ruthless, self-denying, and self-devoted;
Title:  in peace, just, generous, hospitable, revengeful, superstitious, modest, and
Title:  commonly chaste. These are qualities, it is true, which do not distinguish
Title:  all alike; but they are so far the predominating traits of these remarkable
Title:  people as to be characteristic.
Title:  
Title:  It is generally believed that the Aborigines of the American continent have
Title:  an Asiatic origin. There are many physical as well as moral facts which
Title:  corroborate this opinion, and some few that would seem to weigh against it.
Title:  
Title:  The color of the Indian, the writer believes, is peculiar to himself, and
Title:  while his cheek-bones have a very striking indication of a Tartar origin,
Title:  his eyes have not. Climate may have had great influence on the former, but
Title:  it is difficult to see how it can have produced the substantial difference
Title:  which exists in the latter. The imagery of the Indian, both in his poetry
Title:  and in his oratory, is oriental; chastened, and perhaps improved, by the
Title:  limited range of his practical knowledge. He draws his metaphors from the
Title:  clouds, the seasons, the birds, the beasts, and the vegetable world. In
Title:  this, perhaps, he does no more than any other energetic and imaginative race
Title:  would do, being compelled to set bounds to fancy by experience; but the
Title:  North American Indian clothes his ideas in a dress which is different from
Title:  that of the African, and is oriental in itself. His language has the
Title:  richness and sententious fullness of the Chinese. He will express a phrase
Title:  in a word, and he will qualify the meaning of an entire sentence by a
Title:  syllable; he will even convey different significations by the simplest
Title:  inflections of the voice.
Title:  
Title:  Philologists have said that there are but two or three languages, properly
Title:  speaking, among all the numerous tribes which formerly occupied the country
Title:  that now composes the United States. They ascribe the known difficulty one
Title:  people have to understand another to corruptions and dialects. The writer
Title:  remembers to have been present at an interview between two chiefs of the
Title:  Great Prairies west of the Mississippi, and when an interpreter was in
Title:  attendance who spoke both their languages. The warriors appeared to be on
Title:  the most friendly terms, and seemingly conversed much together; yet,
Title:  according to the account of the interpreter, each was absolutely ignorant of
Title:  what the other said. They were of hostile tribes, brought together by the
Title:  influence of the American government; and it is worthy of remark, that a
Title:  common policy led them both to adopt the same subject. They mutually
Title:  exhorted each other to be of use in the event of the chances of war throwing
Title:  either of the parties into the hands of his enemies. Whatever may be the
Title:  truth, as respects the root and the genius of the Indian tongues, it is
Title:  quite certain they are now so distinct in their words as to possess most of
Title:  the disadvantages of strange languages; hence much of the embarrassment that
Title:  has arisen in learning their histories, and most of the uncertainty which
Title:  exists in their traditions.
Title:  
Title:  Like nations of higher pretensions, the American Indian gives a very
Title:  different account of his own tribe or race from that which is given by other
Title:  people. He is much addicted to overestimating his own perfections, and to
Title:  undervaluing those of his rival or his enemy; a trait which may possibly be
Title:  thought corroborative of the Mosaic account of the creation.
Title:  
Title:  The whites have assisted greatly in rendering the traditions of the
Title:  Aborigines more obscure by their own manner of corrupting names. Thus, the
Title:  term used in the title of this book has undergone the changes of Mahicanni,
Title:  Mohicans, and Mohegans; the latter being the word commonly used by the
Title:  whites. When it is remembered that the Dutch (who first settled New York),
Title:  the English, and the French, all gave appellations to the tribes that dwelt
Title:  within the country which is the scene of this story, and that the Indians
Title:  not only gave different names to their enemies, but frequently to
Title:  themselves, the cause of the confusion will be understood.
Title:  
Title:  In these pages, Lenni-Lenape, Lenope, Delawares, Wapanachki, and Mohicans,
Title:  all mean the same people, or tribes of the same stock. The Mengwe, the
Title:  Maquas, the Mingoes, and the Iroquois, though not all strictly the same, are
Title:  identified frequently by the speakers, being politically confederated and
Title:  opposed to those just named. Mingo was a term of peculiar reproach, as were
Title:  Mengwe and Maqua in a less degree.
Title:  
Title:  The Mohicans were the possessors of the country first occupied by the
Title:  Europeans in this portion of the continent. They were, consequently, the
Title:  first dispossessed; and the seemingly inevitable fate of all these people,
Title:  who disappear before the advances, or it might be termed the inroads, of
Title:  civilization, as the verdure of their native forests falls before the
Title:  nipping frosts, is represented as having already befallen them. There is
Title:  sufficient historical truth in the picture to justify the use that has been
Title:  made of it.
Title:  
Title:  In point of fact, the country which is the scene of the following tale has
Title:  undergone as little change, since the historical events alluded to had
Title:  place, as almost any other district of equal extent within the whole limits
Title:  of the United States. There are fashionable and well-attended
Title:  watering-places at and near the spring where Hawkeye halted to drink, and
Title:  roads traverse the forests where he and his friends were compelled to
Title:  journey without even a path. Glen's has a large village; and while William
Title:  Henry, and even a fortress of later date, are only to be traced as ruins,
Title:  there is another village on the shores of the Horican. But, beyond this, the
Title:  enterprise and energy of a people who have done so much in other places have
Title:  done little here. The whole of that wilderness, in which the latter
Title:  incidents of the legend occurred, is nearly a wilderness still, though the
Title:  red man has entirely deserted this part of the state. Of all the tribes
Title:  named in these pages, there exist only a few half-civilized beings of the
Title:  Oneidas, on the reservations of their people in New York. The rest have
Title:  disappeared, either from the regions in which their fathers dwelt, or
Title:  altogether from the earth.
Title:  
Title:  There is one point on which we would wish to say a word before closing this
Title:  preface. Hawkeye calls the Lac du Saint Sacrement, the Horican. As we
Title:  believe this to be an appropriation of the name that has its origin with
Title:  ourselves, the time has arrived, perhaps, when the fact should be frankly
Title:  admitted. While writing this book, fully a quarter of a century since, it
Title:  occurred to us that the French name of this lake was too complicated, the
Title:  American too commonplace, and the Indian too unpronounceable, for either to
Title:  be used familiarly in a work of fiction. Looking over an ancient map, it was
Title:  ascertained that a tribe of Indians, called Les Horicans by the French,
Title:  existed in the neighborhood of this beautiful sheet of water. As every word
Title:  uttered by Natty Bumppo was not to be received as rigid truth, we took the
Title:  liberty of putting the Horican into his mouth, as the substitute for Lake
Title:  George. The name has appeared to find favor, and all things considered, it
Title:  may possibly be quite as well to let it stand, instead of going back to the
Title:  House of Hanover for the appellation of our finest sheet of water. We
Title:  relieve our conscience by the confession, at all events leaving it to
Title:  exercise its authority as it may see fit.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 1
Title:  
Title:       Mine ear is open, and my heart prepared:
Title:       The worst is wordly loss thou canst unfold: -
Title:       Say, is my kingdom lost?
Title:  
Title:                                                             SHAKESPEARE
Title:  
Title:  It was a feature peculiar to the colonial wars of North America, that the
Title:  toils and dangers of the wilderness were to be encountered before the
Title:  adverse hosts could meet. A wide and apparently an impervious boundary of
Title:  forests severed the possessions of the hostile provinces of France and
Title:  England. The hardy colonist, and the trained European who fought at his
Title:  side, frequently expended months in struggling against the rapids of the
Title:  streams, or in effecting the rugged passes of the mountains, in quest of an
Title:  opportunity to exhibit their courage in a more martial conflict. But,
Title:  emulating the patience and self-denial of the practiced native warriors,
Title:  they learned to overcome every difficulty; and it would seem that, in time,
Title:  there was no recess of the woods so dark, nor any secret place so lovely,
Title:  that it might claim exemption from the inroads of those who had pledged
Title:  their blood to satiate their vengeance, or to uphold the cold and selfish
Title:  policy of the distant monarchs of Europe.
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps no district throughout the wide extent of the intermediate frontiers
Title:  can furnish a livelier picture of the cruelty and fierceness of the savage
Title:  warfare of those periods than the country which lies between the head waters
Title:  of the Hudson and the adjacent lakes.
Title:  
Title:  The facilities which nature had there offered to the march of the combatants
Title:  were too obvious to be neglected. The lengthened sheet of the Champlain
Title:  stretched from the frontiers of Canada, deep within the borders of the
Title:  neighboring province of New York, forming a natural passage across half the
Title:  distance that the French were compelled to master in order to strike their
Title:  enemies. Near its southern termination, it received the contributions of
Title:  another lake, whose waters were so limpid as to have been exclusively
Title:  selected by the Jesuit missionaries to perform the typical purification of
Title:  baptism, and to obtain for it the title of lake du Saint Sacrement. The less
Title:  zealous English thought they conferred a sufficient honor on its unsullied
Title:  fountains, when they bestowed the name of their reigning prince, the second
Title:  of the house of Hanover. The two united to rob the untutored possessors of
Title:  its wooded scenery of their native right to perpetuate its original
Title:  appellation of Horican.1
Title:  
Title:  Winding its way among countless islands, and imbedded in mountains, the holy
Title:  lake extended a dozen leagues still further to the south. With the high
Title:  plain that there interposed itself to the further passage of the water,
Title:  commenced a portage of as many miles, which conducted the adventurer to the
Title:  banks of the Hudson, at a point where, with the usual obstructions of the
Title:  rapids, or rifts, as they were then termed in the language of the country,
Title:  the river became navigable to the tide.
Title:  
Title:  While, in the pursuit of their daring plans of annoyance, the restless
Title:  enterprise of the French even attempted the distant and difficult gorges of
Title:  the Alleghany, it may easily be imagined that their proverbial acuteness
Title:  would not overlook the natural advantages of the district we have just
Title:  described. It became, emphatically, the bloody arena, in which most of the
Title:  battles for the mastery of the colonies were contested. Forts were erected
Title:  at the different points that commanded the facilities of the route, and were
Title:  taken and retaken, razed and rebuilt, as victory alighted on the hostile
Title:  banners. While the husbandman shrank back from the dangerous passes, within
Title:  the safer boundaries of the more ancient settlements, armies larger than
Title:  those that had often disposed of the scepters of the mother countries, were
Title:  seen to bury themselves in these forests, whence they rarely returned but in
Title:  skeleton bands, that were haggard with care or dejected by defeat. Though
Title:  the arts of peace were unknown to this fatal region, its forests were alive
Title:  with men; its shades and glens rang with the sounds of martial music, and
Title:  the echoes of its mountains threw back the laugh, or repeated the wanton
Title:  cry, of many a gallant and reckless youth, as he hurried by them, in the
Title:  noontide of his spirits, to slumber in a long night of forgetfulness.
Title:  
Title:  It was in this scene of strife and bloodshed that the incidents we shall
Title:  attempt to relate occurred, during the third year of the war which England
Title:  and France last waged for the possession of a country that neither was
Title:  destined to retain.
Title:  
Title:  The imbecility of her military leaders abroad, and the fatal want of energy
Title:  in her councils at home, had lowered the character of Great Britain from the
Title:  proud elevation on which it had been placed by the talents and enterprise of
Title:  her former warriors and statesmen. No longer dreaded by her enemies, her
Title:  servants were fast losing the confidence of self-respect. In this mortifying
Title:  abasement, the colonists, though innocent of her imbecility, and too humble
Title:  to be the agents of her blunders, were but the natural participators. They
Title:  had recently seen a chosen army from that country, which, reverencing as a
Title:  mother, they had blindly believed invincible - an army led by a chief who
Title:  had been selected from a crowd of trained warriors, for his rare military
Title:  endowments, disgracefully routed by a handful of French and Indians, and
Title:  only saved from annihilation by the coolness and spirit of a Virginian boy,
Title:  whose riper fame has since diffused itself, with the steady influence of
Title:  moral truth, to the uttermost confines of Christendom.2 A wide frontier had
Title:  been laid naked by this unexpected disaster, and more substantial evils were
Title:  preceded by a thousand fanciful and imaginary dangers. The alarmed colonists
Title:  believed that the yells of the savages mingled with every fitful gust of
Title:  wind that issued from the interminable forests of the west. The terrific
Title:  character of their merciless enemies increased immeasurably the natural
Title:  horrors of warfare. Numberless recent massacres were still vivid in their
Title:  recollections; nor was there any ear in the provinces so deaf as not to have
Title:  drunk in with avidity the narrative of some fearful tale of midnight murder,
Title:  in which the natives of the forests were the principal and barbarous actors.
Title:  As the credulous and excited traveler related the hazardous chances of the
Title:  wilderness, the blood of the timid curdled with terror, and mothers cast
Title:  anxious glances even at those children which slumbered within the security
Title:  of the largest towns. In short, the magnifying influence of fear began to
Title:  set at naught the calculations of reason, and to render those who should
Title:  have remembered their manhood, the slaves of the basest passions. Even the
Title:  most confident and the stoutest hearts began to think the issue of the
Title:  contest was becoming doubtful; and that abject class was hourly increasing
Title:  in numbers, who thought they foresaw all the possessions of the English
Title:  crown in America subdued by their Christian foes, or laid waste by the
Title:  inroads of their relentless allies.
Title:  
Title:  When, therefore, intelligence was received at the fort which covered the
Title:  southern termination of the portage between the Hudson and the lakes, that
Title:  Montcalm had been seen moving up the Champlain, with an army numerous as the
Title:  leaves on the trees, its truth was admitted with more of the craven
Title:  reluctance of fear than with the stern joy that a warrior should feel, in
Title:  finding an enemy within reach of his blow. The news had been brought, toward
Title:  the decline of a day in midsummer, by an Indian runner, who also bore an
Title:  urgent request from Munro, the commander of a work on the shore of the holy
Title:  lake, for a speedy and powerful reinforcement. It has already been mentioned
Title:  that the distance between these two posts was less than five leagues. The
Title:  rude path, which originally formed their line of communication, had been
Title:  widened for the passage of wagons; so that the distance which had been
Title:  traveled by the son of the forest in two hours, might easily be effected by
Title:  a detachment of troops, with their necessary baggage, between the rising and
Title:  setting of a summer sun. The loyal servants of the British crown had given
Title:  to one of these forest-fastnesses the name of William Henry, and to the
Title:  other that of Fort Edward, calling each after a favorite prince of the
Title:  reigning family. The veteran Scotchman just named held the first, with a
Title:  regiment of regulars and a few provincials; a force really by far too small
Title:  to make head against the formidable power that Montcalm was leading to the
Title:  foot of his earthen mounds. At the latter, however, lay General Webb, who
Title:  commanded the armies of the king in the northern provinces, with a body of
Title:  more than five thousand men. By uniting the several detachments of his
Title:  command, this officer might have arrayed nearly double that number of
Title:  combatants against the enterprising Frenchman, who had ventured so far from
Title:  his reinforcements, with an army but little superior in numbers.
Title:  
Title:  But under the influence of their degraded fortunes, both officers and men
Title:  appeared better disposed to await the approach of their formidable
Title:  antagonists, within their works, than to resist the progress of their march,
Title:  by emulating the successful example of the French at Fort du Quesne, and
Title:  striking a blow on their advance.
Title:  
Title:  After the first surprise of the intelligence had a little abated, a rumor
Title:  was spread through the entrenched camp, which stretched along the margin of
Title:  the Hudson, forming a chain of outworks to the body of the fort itself, that
Title:  a chosen detachment of fifteen hundred men was to depart, with the dawn, for
Title:  William Henry, the post at the northern extremity of the portage. That which
Title:  at first was only rumor, soon became certainty, as orders passed from the
Title:  quarters of the commander-in-chief to the several corps he had selected for
Title:  this service, to prepare for their speedy departure. All doubts as to the
Title:  intention of Webb now vanished, and an hour or two of hurried footsteps and
Title:  anxious faces succeeded. The novice in the military art flew from point to
Title:  point, retarding his own preparations by the excess of his violent and
Title:  somewhat distempered zeal; while the more practiced veteran made his
Title:  arrangements with a deliberation that scorned every appearance of haste;
Title:  though his sober lineaments and anxious eye sufficiently betrayed that he
Title:  had no very strong professional relish for the, as yet, untried and dreaded
Title:  warfare of the wilderness. At length the sun set in a flood of glory, behind
Title:  the distant western hills, and as darkness drew its veil around the secluded
Title:  spot the sounds of preparation diminished; the last light finally
Title:  disappeared from the log cabin of some officer; the trees cast their deeper
Title:  shadows over the mounds and the rippling stream, and a silence soon pervaded
Title:  the camp, as deep as that which reigned in the vast forest by which it was
Title:  environed.
Title:  
Title:  According to the orders of the preceding night, the heavy sleep of the army
Title:  was broken by the rolling of the warning drums, whose rattling echoes were
Title:  heard issuing, on the damp morning air, out of every vista of the woods,
Title:  just as day began to draw the shaggy outlines of some tall pines of the
Title:  vicinity, on the opening brightness of a soft and cloudless eastern sky. In
Title:  an instant the whole camp was in motion; the meanest soldier arousing from
Title:  his lair to witness the departure of his comrades, and to share in the
Title:  excitement and incidents of the hour. The simple array of the chosen band
Title:  was soon completed. While the regular and trained hirelings of the king
Title:  marched with haughtiness to the right of the line, the less pretending
Title:  colonists took their humbler position on its left, with a docility that long
Title:  practice had rendered easy. The scouts departed; strong guards preceded and
Title:  followed the lumbering vehicles that bore the baggage; and before the gray
Title:  light of the morning was mellowed by the rays of the sun, the main body of
Title:  the combatants wheeled into column, and left the encampment with a show of
Title:  high military bearing, that served to drown the slumbering apprehensions of
Title:  many a novice, who was now about to make his first essay in arms. While in
Title:  view of their admiring comrades, the same proud front and ordered array was
Title:  observed, until the notes of their fifes growing fainter in distance, the
Title:  forest at length appeared to swallow up the living mass which had slowly
Title:  entered its bosom.
Title:  
Title:  The deepest sounds of the retiring and invisible column had ceased to be
Title:  borne on the breeze to the listeners, and the latest straggler had already
Title:  disappeared in pursuit; but there still remained the signs of another
Title:  departure, before a log cabin of unusual size and accommodations, in front
Title:  of which those sentinels paced their rounds, who were known to guard the
Title:  person of the English general. At this spot were gathered some half dozen
Title:  horses, caparisoned in a manner which showed that two, at least, were
Title:  destined to bear the persons of females, of a rank that it was not usual to
Title:  meet so far in the wilds of the country. A third wore trappings and arms of
Title:  an officer of the staff; while the rest, from the plainness of the housings,
Title:  and the traveling mails with which they were encumbered, were evidently
Title:  fitted for the reception of as many menials, who were, seemingly, already
Title:  waiting the pleasure of those they served. At a respectful distance from
Title:  this unusual show, were gathered divers groups of curious idlers; some
Title:  admiring the blood and bone of the high-mettled military charger, and others
Title:  gazing at the preparations, with the dull wonder of vulgar curiosity. There
Title:  was one man, however, who, by his countenance and actions, formed a marked
Title:  exception to those who composed the latter class of spectators, being
Title:  neither idle, nor seemingly very ignorant.
Title:  
Title:  The person of this individual was to the last degree ungainly, without being
Title:  in any particular manner deformed. He had all the bones and joints of other
Title:  men, without any of their proportions. Erect, his stature surpassed that of
Title:  his fellows; though seated, he appeared reduced within the ordinary limits
Title:  of the race. The same contrariety in his members seemed to exist throughout
Title:  the whole man. His head was large; his shoulders narrow; his arms long and
Title:  dangling; while his hands were small, if not delicate. His legs and thighs
Title:  were thin, nearly to emaciation, but of extraordinary length; and his knees
Title:  would have been considered tremendous, had they not been outdone by the
Title:  broader foundations on which this false superstructure of blended human
Title:  orders was so profanely reared. The ill-assorted and injudicious attire of
Title:  the individual only served to render his awkwardness more conspicuous. A
Title:  sky-blue coat, with short and broad skirts and low cape, exposed a long,
Title:  thin neck, and longer and thinner legs, to the worst animadversions of the
Title:  evil-disposed. His nether garment was a yellow nankeen, closely fitted to
Title:  the shape, and tied at his bunches of knees by large knots of white ribbon,
Title:  a good deal sullied by use. Clouded cotton stockings, and shoes, on one of
Title:  the latter of which was a plated spur, completed the costume of the lower
Title:  extremity of this figure, no curve or angle of which was concealed, but, on
Title:  the other hand, studiously exhibited, through the vanity or simplicity of
Title:  its owner. From beneath the flap of an enormous pocket of a soiled vest of
Title:  embossed silk, heavily ornamented with tarnished silver lace, projected an
Title:  instrument, which, from being seen in such martial company, might have been
Title:  easily mistaken for some mischievous and unknown implement of war. Small as
Title:  it was, this uncommon engine had excited the curiousity of most of the
Title:  Europeans in the camp, though several of the provincials were seen to handle
Title:  it, not only without fear, but with the utmost familiarity. A large, civil
Title:  cocked hat, like those worn by clergymen within the last thirty years,
Title:  surmounted the whole, furnishing dignity to a good-natured and somewhat
Title:  vacant countenance, that apparently needed such artificial aid, to support
Title:  the gravity of some high and extraordinary trust.
Title:  
Title:  While the common herd stood aloof, in deference to the quarters of Webb, the
Title:  figure we have described stalked into the center of the domestics, freely
Title:  expressing his censures or commendations on the merits of the horses, as by
Title:  chance they displeased or satisfied his judgment.
Title:  
Title:  This beast, I rather conclude, friend, is not of home raising, but is from
Title:  foreign lands, or perhaps from the little island itself over the blue water?
Title:  he said, in a voice as remarkable for the softness and sweetness of its
Title:  tones, as was his person for its rare proportions; I may speak of these
Title:  things, and be no braggart; for I have been down at both havens; that which
Title:  is situate at the mouth of Thames, and is named after the capital of Old
Title:  England, and that which is called Haven, with the addition of the word New';
Title:  and have seen the scows and brigantines collecting their droves, like the
Title:  gathering to the ark, being outward bound to the Island of Jamaica, for the
Title:  purpose of barter and traffic in four-footed animals; but never before have
Title:  I beheld a beast which verified the true scripture war-horse like this: He
Title:  paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength; he goeth on to meet the
Title:  armed men. He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smelleth the battle
Title:  afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting. - It would seem
Title:  that the stock of the horse of Israel had descended to our own time; would
Title:  it not, friend?
Title:  
Title:  Receiving no reply to this extraordinary appeal, which in truth, as it was
Title:  delivered with the vigor of full and sonorous tones, merited some sort of
Title:  notice, he who had thus sung forth the language of the holy book turned to
Title:  the silent figure to whom he had unwittingly addressed himself, and found a
Title:  new and more powerful subject of admiration in the object that encountered
Title:  his gaze. His eyes fell on the still, upright, and rigid form of the Indian
Title:  runner, who had borne to the camp the unwelcome tidings of the preceding
Title:  evening. Although in a state of perfect repose, and apparently disregarding,
Title:  with characteristic stoicism, the excitement and bustle around him, there
Title:  was a sullen fierceness mingled with the quiet of the savage, that was
Title:  likely to arrest the attention of much more experienced eyes than those
Title:  which now scanned him, in unconcealed amazement. The native bore both the
Title:  tomahawk and knife of his tribe; and yet his appearance was not altogether
Title:  that of a warrior. On the contrary, there was an air of neglect about his
Title:  person, like that which might have proceeded from great and recent exertion,
Title:  which he had not yet found leisure to repair. The colors of the war-paint
Title:  had blended in dark confusion about his fierce countenance, and rendered his
Title:  swarthy lineaments still more savage and repulsive than if art had attempted
Title:  an effect which had been thus produced by chance. His eye, alone, which
Title:  glistened like a fiery star amid lowering clouds, was to be seen in its
Title:  state of native wildness. For a single instant his searching and yet wary
Title:  glance met the wondering look of the other, and then changing its direction,
Title:  partly in cunning, and partly in disdain, it remained fixed, as if
Title:  penetrating the distant air.
Title:  
Title:  It is impossible to say what unlooked-for remark this short and silent
Title:  communication, between two such singular men, might have elicited from the
Title:  white man, had not his active curiosity been again drawn to other objects. A
Title:  general movement among the domestics, and a low sound of gentle voices,
Title:  announced the approach of those whose presence alone was wanted to enable
Title:  the cavalcade to move. The simple admirer of the war-horse instantly fell
Title:  back to a low, gaunt, switch-tailed mare, that was unconsciously gleaning
Title:  the faded herbage of the camp nigh by; where, leaning with one elbow on the
Title:  blanket that concealed an apology for a saddle, he became a spectator of the
Title:  departure, while a foal was quietly making its morning repast, on the
Title:  opposite side of the same animal.
Title:  
Title:  A young man, in the dress of an officer, conducted to their steeds two
Title:  females, who, as it was apparent by their dresses, were prepared to
Title:  encounter the fatigues of a journey in the woods. One, and she was the more
Title:  juvenile in her appearance, though both were young, permitted glimpses of
Title:  her dazzling complexion, fair golden hair, and bright blue eyes, to be
Title:  caught, as she artlessly suffered the morning air to blow aside the green
Title:  veil which descended low from her beaver.
Title:  
Title:  The flush which still lingered above the pines in the western sky was not
Title:  more bright nor delicate than the bloom on her cheek; nor was the opening
Title:  day more cheering than the animated smile which she bestowed on the youth,
Title:  as he assisted her into the saddle. The other, who appeared to share equally
Title:  in the attention of the young officer, concealed her charms from the gaze of
Title:  the soldiery with a care that seemed better fitted to the experience of four
Title:  or five additional years. It could be seen, however, that her person, though
Title:  molded with the same exquisite proportions, of which none of the graces were
Title:  lost by the traveling dress she wore, was rather fuller and more mature than
Title:  that of her companion.
Title:  
Title:  No sooner were these females seated, than their attendant sprang lightly
Title:  into the saddle of the war-horse, when the whole three bowed to Webb, who in
Title:  courtesy, awaited their parting on the threshold of his cabin and turning
Title:  their horses' heads, they proceeded at a slow amble, followed by their
Title:  train, toward the northern entrance of the encampment. As they traversed
Title:  that short distance, not a voice was heard among them; but a slight
Title:  exclamation proceeded from the younger of the females, as the Indian runner
Title:  glided by her, unexpectedly, and led the way along the military road in her
Title:  front. Though this sudden and startling movement of the Indian produced no
Title:  sound from the other, in the surprise her veil also was allowed to open its
Title:  folds, and betrayed an indescribable look of pity, admiration, and horror,
Title:  as her dark eye followed the easy motions of the savage. The tresses of this
Title:  lady were shining and black, like the plumage of the raven. Her complexion
Title:  was not brown, but it rather appeared charged with the color of the rich
Title:  blood, that seemed ready to burst its bounds. And yet there was neither
Title:  coarseness nor want of shadowing in a countenance that was exquisitely
Title:  regular, and dignified and surpassingly beautiful. She smiled, as if in pity
Title:  at her own momentary forgetfulness, discovering by the act a row of teeth
Title:  that would have shamed the purest ivory; when, replacing the veil, she bowed
Title:  her face, and rode in silence, like one whose thoughts were abstracted from
Title:  the scene around her.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 As each nation of the Indians had its language or its dialect, they
Title:  usually gave different names to the same places, though nearly all of their
Title:  appellations were descriptive of the object. Thus a literal translation of
Title:  the name of this beautiful sheet of water, used by the tribe that dwelt on
Title:  its banks, would be The Tail of the Lake. Lake George, as it is vulgarly,
Title:  and now, indeed, legally, called, forms a sort of tail to Lake Champlain,
Title:  when viewed on the map. Hence, the name.
Title:  
Title:  2 Washington, who, after uselessly admonishing the European general of the
Title:  danger into which he was heedlessly running, saved the remnants of the
Title:  British army, on this occasion, by his decision and courage. The reputation
Title:  earned by Washington in this battle was the principal cause of his being
Title:  selected to command the American armies at a later day. It is a circumstance
Title:  worthy of observation, that while all America rang with his well-merited
Title:  reputation, his name does not occur in any European account of the battle;
Title:  at least the author has searched for it without success. In this manner does
Title:  the mother country absorb even the fame, under that system of rule.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 2
Title:  
Title:       Sola, sola, wo ha, ho, sola!
Title:  
Title:                                                             SHAKESPEARE
Title:  
Title:  While one of the lovely beings we have so cursorily presented to the reader
Title:  was thus lost in thought, the other quickly recovered from the alarm which
Title:  induced the exclamation, and, laughing at her own weakness, she inquired of
Title:  the youth who rode by her side:
Title:  
Title:  Are such specters frequent in the woods, Heyward, or is this sight an
Title:  especial entertainment ordered on our behalf? If the latter, gratitude must
Title:  close our mouths; but if the former, both Cora and I shall have need to draw
Title:  largely on that stock of hereditary courage which we boast, even before we
Title:  are made to encounter the redoubtable Montcalm.
Title:  
Title:  Yon Indian is a runner of the army; and, after the fashion of his people, he
Title:  may be accounted a hero, returned the officer. He has volunteered to guide
Title:  us to the lake, by a path but little known, sooner than if we followed the
Title:  tardy movements of the column; and, by consequence, more agreeably.
Title:  
Title:  I like him not, said the lady, shuddering, partly in assumed, yet more in
Title:  real terror. You know him, Duncan, or you would not trust yourself so freely
Title:  to his keeping?
Title:  
Title:  Say, rather, Alice, that I would not trust you. I do know him, or he would
Title:  not have my confidence, and least of all at this moment. He is said to be a
Title:  Canadian too; and yet he served with our friends the Mohawks, who, as you
Title:  know, are one of the six allied nations.1 He was brought among us, as I have
Title:  heard, by some strange accident in which your father was interested, and in
Title:  which the savage was rigidly dealt by; but I forget the idle tale, it is
Title:  enough, that he is now our friend.
Title:  
Title:  If he has been my father's enemy, I like him still less! exclaimed the now
Title:  really anxious girl. Will you not speak to him, Major Heyward, that I may
Title:  hear his tones? Foolish though it may be, you have often heard me avow my
Title:  faith in the tones of the human voice!
Title:  
Title:  It would be in vain; and answered, most probably, by an ejaculation. Though
Title:  he may understand it, he affects, like most of his people, to be ignorant of
Title:  the English; and least of all will he condescend to speak it, now that the
Title:  war demands the utmost exercise of his dignity. But he stops; the private
Title:  path by which we are to journey is, doubtless, at hand.
Title:  
Title:  The conjecture of Major Heyward was true. When they reached the spot where
Title:  the Indian stood, pointing into the thicket that fringed the military road;
Title:  a narrow and blind path, which might, with some little inconvenience,
Title:  receive one person at a time, became visible.
Title:  
Title:  Here, then, lies our way, said the young man, in a low voice. Manifest no
Title:  distrust, or you may invite the danger you appear to apprehend.
Title:  
Title:  Cora, what think you? asked the reluctant fair one. If we journey with the
Title:  troops, though we may find their presence irksome, shall we not feel better
Title:  assurance of our safety?
Title:  
Title:  Being little accustomed to the practices of the savages, Alice, you mistake
Title:  the place of real danger, said Heyward. If enemies have reached the portage
Title:  at all, a thing by no means probable, as our scouts are abroad, they will
Title:  surely be found skirting the column, where scalps abound the most. The route
Title:  of the detachment is known, while ours, having been determined within the
Title:  hour, must still be secret.
Title:  
Title:  Should we distrust the man because his manners are not our manners, and that
Title:  his skin is dark? coldly asked Cora.
Title:  
Title:  Alice hesitated no longer; but giving her Narrangansett2 a smart cut of the
Title:  whip, she was the first to dash aside the slight branches of the bushes, and
Title:  to follow the runner along the dark and tangled pathway. The young man
Title:  regarded the last speaker in open admiration, and even permitted her fairer,
Title:  though certainly not more beautiful companion, to proceed unattended, while
Title:  he sedulously opened the way himself for the passage of her who has been
Title:  called Cora. It would seem that the domestics had been previously
Title:  instructed; for, instead of penetrating the thicket, they followed the route
Title:  of the column; a measure which Heyward stated had been dictated by the
Title:  sagacity of their guide, in order to diminish the marks of their trail, if,
Title:  haply, the Canadian savages should be lurking so far in advance of their
Title:  army. For many minutes the intricacy of the route admitted of no further
Title:  dialogue; after which they emerged from the broad border of underbrush which
Title:  grew along the line of the highway, and entered under the high but dark
Title:  arches of the forest. Here their progress was less interrupted; and the
Title:  instant the guide perceived that the females could command their steeds, he
Title:  moved on, at a pace between a trot and a walk, and at a rate which kept the
Title:  sure-footed and peculiar animals they rode at a fast yet easy amble. The
Title:  youth had turned to speak to the dark-eyed Cora, when the distant sound of
Title:  horses; hoofs, clattering over the roots of the broken way in his rear,
Title:  caused him to check his charger; and, as his companions drew their reins at
Title:  the same instant, the whole party came to a halt, in order to obtain an
Title:  explanation of the unlooked-for interruption. In a few moments a colt was
Title:  seen gliding, like a fallow deer, among the straight trunks of the pines;
Title:  and, in another instant, the person of the ungainly man, described in the
Title:  preceding chapter, came into view, with as much rapidity as he could excite
Title:  his meager beast to endure without coming to an open rupture. Until now this
Title:  personage had escaped the observation of the travelers. If he possessed the
Title:  power to arrest any wandering eye when exhibiting the glories of his
Title:  altitude on foot, his equestrian graces were still more likely to attract
Title:  attention.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding a constant application of his one armed heel to the flanks
Title:  of the mare, the most confirmed gait that he could establish was a
Title:  Canterbury gallop with the hind legs, in which those more forward assisted
Title:  for doubtful moments, though generally content to maintain a loping trot.
Title:  Perhaps the rapidity of the changes from one of these paces to the other
Title:  created an optical illusion, which might thus magnify the powers of the
Title:  beast; for it is certain that Heyward, who possessed a true eye for the
Title:  merits of a horse, was unable, with his utmost ingenuity, to decide by what
Title:  sort of movement his pursuer worked his sinuous way on his footsteps with
Title:  such persevering hardihood.
Title:  
Title:  The industry and movements of the rider were not less remarkable than those
Title:  of the ridden. At each change in the evolutions of the latter, the former
Title:  raised his tall person in the stirrups; producing, in this manner, by the
Title:  undue elongation of his legs, such sudden growths and diminishings of the
Title:  stature, as baffled every conjecture that might be made as to his
Title:  dimensions. If to this be added the fact that, in consequence of the ex
Title:  parte application of the spur, one side of the mare appeared to journey
Title:  faster than the other; and that the aggrieved flank was resolutely indicated
Title:  by unremitted flourishes of a bushy tail, we finish the picture of both
Title:  horse and man.
Title:  
Title:  The frown which had gathered around the handsome, open, and manly brow of
Title:  Heyward, gradually relaxed, and his lips curled into a slight smile, as he
Title:  regarded the stranger. Alice made no very powerful effort to control her
Title:  merriment; and even the dark, thoughtful eye of Cora lighted with a humor
Title:  that it would seem, the habit, rather than the nature, of its mistress
Title:  repressed.
Title:  
Title:  Seek you any here? demanded Heyward, when the other had arrived sufficiently
Title:  nigh to abate his speed; I trust you are no messenger of evil tidings?
Title:  
Title:  Even so, replied the stranger, making diligent use of his triangular castor,
Title:  to produce a circulation in the close air of the woods, and leaving his
Title:  hearers in doubt to which of the young man's questions he responded; when,
Title:  however, he had cooled his face, and recovered his breath, he continued, I
Title:  hear you are riding to William Henry; as I am journeying thitherward myself,
Title:  I concluded good company would seem consistent to the wishes of both
Title:  parties.
Title:  
Title:  You appear to possess the privilege of a casting vote, returned Heyward; we
Title:  are three, while you have consulted no one but yourself.
Title:  
Title:  Even so. The first point to be obtained is to know one's own mind. Once sure
Title:  of that, and where women are concerned it is not easy, the next is, to act
Title:  up to the decision. I have endeavored to do both, and here I am.
Title:  
Title:  If you journey to the lake, you have mistaken your route, said Heyward,
Title:  haughtily; the highway thither is at least half a mile behind you.
Title:  
Title:  Even so, returned the stranger, nothing daunted by this cold reception; I
Title:  have tarried at Edward a week, and I should be dumb not to have inquired the
Title:  road I was to journey; and if dumb there would be an end to my calling.
Title:  After simpering in a small way, like one whose modesty prohibited a more
Title:  open expression of his admiration of a witticism that was perfectly
Title:  unintelligible to his hearers, he continued, It is not prudent for any one
Title:  of my profession to be too familiar with those he has to instruct; for which
Title:  reason I follow not the line of the army; besides which, I conclude that a
Title:  gentleman of your character has the best judgment in matters of wayfaring; I
Title:  have, therefore, decided to join company, in order that the ride may be made
Title:  agreeable, and partake of social communion.
Title:  
Title:  A most arbitrary, if not a hasty decision! exclaimed Heyward, undecided
Title:  whether to give vent to his growing anger, or to laugh in the other's face.
Title:  But you speak of instruction, and of a profession; are you an adjunct to the
Title:  provincial corps, as a master of the noble science of defense and offense;
Title:  or, perhaps, you are one who draws lines and angles, under the pretense of
Title:  expounding the mathematics?
Title:  
Title:  The stranger regarded his interrogator a moment in wonder; and then, losing
Title:  every mark of self-satisfaction in an expression of solemn humility, he
Title:  answered:
Title:  
Title:  Of offense, I hope there is none, to either party: of defense, I make none -
Title:  by God's good mercy, having committed no palpable sin since last entreating
Title:  his pardoning grace. I understand not your allusions about lines and angles;
Title:  and I leave expounding to those who have been called and set apart for that
Title:  holy office. I lay claim to no higher gift than a small insight into the
Title:  glorious art of petitioning and thanksgiving, as practiced in psalmody.
Title:  
Title:  The man is, most manifestly, a disciple of Apollo, cried the amused Alice,
Title:  and I take him under my own especial protection. Nay, throw aside that
Title:  frown, Heyward, and in pity to my longing ears, suffer him to journey in our
Title:  train. Besides, she added, in a low and hurried voice, casting a glance at
Title:  the distant Cora, who slowly followed the footsteps of their silent, but
Title:  sullen guide, it may be a friend added to our strength, in time of need.
Title:  
Title:  Think you, Alice, that I would trust those I love by this secret path, did I
Title:  imagine such need could happen?
Title:  
Title:  Nay, nay, I think not of it now; but this strange man amuses me; and if he
Title:  hath music in his soul, let us not churlishly reject his company. She
Title:  pointed persuasively along the path with her riding whip, while their eyes
Title:  met in a look which the young man lingered a moment to prolong; then,
Title:  yielding to her gentle influence, he clapped his spurs into his charger, and
Title:  in a few bounds was again at the side of Cora.
Title:  
Title:  I am glad to encounter thee, friend, continued the maiden, waving her hand
Title:  to the stranger to proceed, as she urged her Narragansett to renew its
Title:  amble. Partial relatives have almost persuaded me that I am not entirely
Title:  worthless in a duet myself; and we may enliven our wayfaring by indulging in
Title:  our favorite pursuit. It might be of signal advantage to one, ignorant as I,
Title:  to hear the opinions and experience of a master in the art.
Title:  
Title:  It is refreshing both to the spirits and to the body to indulge in psalmody,
Title:  in befitting seasons, returned the master of song, unhesitatingly complying
Title:  with her intimation to follow; and nothing would relieve the mind more than
Title:  such a consoling communion. But four parts are altogether necessary to the
Title:  perfection of melody. You have all the manifestations of a soft and rich
Title:  treble; I can, by especial aid, carry a full tenor to the highest letter;
Title:  but we lack counter and bass! Yon officer of the king, who hesitated to
Title:  admit me to his company, might fill the latter, if one may judge from the
Title:  intonations of his voice in common dialogue.
Title:  
Title:  Judge not too rashly from hasty and deceptive appearances, said the lady,
Title:  smiling; though Major Heyward can assume such deep notes on occasion,
Title:  believe me, his natural tones are better fitted for a mellow tenor than the
Title:  bass you heard.
Title:  
Title:  Is he, then, much practiced in the art of psalmody? demanded her simple
Title:  companion.
Title:  
Title:  Alice felt disposed to laugh, though she succeeded in suppressing her
Title:  merriment, ere she answered:
Title:  
Title:  I apprehend that he is rather addicted to profane song. The chances of a
Title:  soldier's life are but little fitted for the encouragement of more sober
Title:  inclinations.
Title:  
Title:  Man's voice is given to him, like his other talents, to be used, and not to
Title:  be abused. None can say they have ever known me to neglect my gifts! I am
Title:  thankful that, though my boyhood may be said to have been set apart, like
Title:  the youth of the royal David, for the purposes of music, no syllable of rude
Title:  verse has ever profaned my lips.
Title:  
Title:  You have, then, limited your efforts to sacred song?
Title:  
Title:  Even so. As the psalms of David exceed all other language, so does the
Title:  psalmody that has been fitted to them by the divines and sages of the land,
Title:  surpass all vain poetry. Happily, I may say that I utter nothing but the
Title:  thoughts and the wishes of the King of Israel himself; for though the times
Title:  may call for some slight changes, yet does this version which we use in the
Title:  colonies of New England so much exceed all other versions, that, by its
Title:  richness, its exactness, and its spiritual simplicity, it approacheth, as
Title:  near as may be, to the great work of the inspired writer. I never abid in
Title:  any place, sleeping or waking, without an example of this gifted work. 'Tis
Title:  the six-and-twentieth edition, promulgated at Boston, Anno Domini 1744; and
Title:  is entitled, The Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs of the Old and New
Title:  Testaments; faithfully translated into English Metre, for the Use,
Title:  Edification, and Comfort of the Saints, in Public and Private, especially in
Title:  New England.
Title:  
Title:  During this eulogium on the rare production of his native poets, the
Title:  stranger had drawn the book from his pocket, and fitting a pair of
Title:  iron-rimmed spectacles to his nose, opened the volume with a care and
Title:  veneration suited to its sacred purposes. Then, without circumlocution or
Title:  apology, first pronounced the word Standish, and placing the unknown engine,
Title:  already described, to his mouth, from which he drew a high, shrill sound,
Title:  that was followed by an octave below, from his own voice, he commenced
Title:  singing the following words, in full, sweet, and melodious tones, that set
Title:  the music, the poetry, and even the uneasy motion of his ill-trained beast
Title:  at defiance;
Title:  
Title:       How good it is, O see,
Title:       And how it pleaseth well,
Title:       Together e'en in unity,
Title:       For brethren so to dwell.
Title:       It's like the choice ointment,
Title:       From the head to the beard did go;
Title:       Down Aaron's head, that downward went
Title:       His garment's skirts unto.
Title:  
Title:  The delivery of these skillful rhymes was accompanied, on the part of the
Title:  stranger, by a regular rise and fall of his right hand, which terminated at
Title:  the descent, by suffering the fingers to dwell a moment on the leaves of the
Title:  little volume; and on the ascent, by such a flourish of the member as none
Title:  but the initiated may ever hope to imitate. It would seem that long practice
Title:  had rendered this manual accompaniment necessary; for it did not cease until
Title:  the preposition which the poet had selected for the close of his verse had
Title:  been duly delivered like a word of two syllables.
Title:  
Title:  Such an innovation on the silence and retirement of the forest could not
Title:  fail to enlist the ears of those who jouneyed at so short a distance in
Title:  advance. The Indian muttered a few words in broken English to Heyward, who,
Title:  in his turn, spoke to the stranger; at once interrupting, and, for the time,
Title:  closing his musical efforts.
Title:  
Title:  Though we are not in danger, common prudence would teach us to journey
Title:  through this wilderness in as quiet a manner as possible. You will then,
Title:  pardon me, Alice, should I diminish your enjoyments, by requesting this
Title:  gentleman to postpone his chant until a safer opportunity.
Title:  
Title:  You will diminish them, indeed, returned the arch girl; for never did I hear
Title:  a more unworthy conjunction of execution and language than that to which I
Title:  have been listening; and I was far gone in a learned inquiry into the causes
Title:  of such an unfitness between sound and sense, when you broke the charm of my
Title:  musings by that bass of yours, Duncan!
Title:  
Title:  I know not what you call my bass, said Heyward, piqued at her remark, but I
Title:  know that your safety, and that of Cora, is far dearer to me than could be
Title:  any orchestra of Handel's music. He paused and turned his head quickly
Title:  toward a thicket, and then bent his eyes suspiciously on their guide, who
Title:  continued his steady pace, in undisturbed gravity. The young man smiled to
Title:  himself, for he belived he had mistaken some shining berry of the woods for
Title:  the glistening eyeballs of a prowling savage, and he rode forward,
Title:  continuing the conversation which had been interrupted by the passing
Title:  thought.
Title:  
Title:  Major Heyward was mistaken only in suffering his youthful and generous pride
Title:  to suppress his active watchfulness. The cavalcade had not long passed,
Title:  before the branches of the bushes that formed the thicket were cautiously
Title:  moved asunder, and a human visage, as fiercely wild as savage art and
Title:  unbridled passions could make it, peered out on the retiring footsteps of
Title:  the travelers. A gleam of exultation shot across the darkly-painted
Title:  lineaments of the inhabitant of the forest, as he traced the route of his
Title:  intended victims, who rode unconsciously onward, the light and graceful
Title:  forms of the females waving among the trees, in the curvatures of their
Title:  path, followed at each bend by the manly figure of Heyward, until, finally,
Title:  the shapeless person of the singing master was concealed behind the
Title:  numberless trunks of trees, that rose, in dark lines, in the intermediate
Title:  space.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 There existed for a long time a confederation among the Indian tribes
Title:  which occupied the northwestern part of the colony of New York which was at
Title:  first known as the Five Nations. At a later day it admitted another tribe,
Title:  when the appellation was changed to that of the Six Nations. The original
Title:  confederation consisted of the Mohawks, the Oneidas, the Senecas, the
Title:  Cayugas, and the Onondagoes. The sixth tribe was the Tuscaroras. There are
Title:  remnants of all these people still living on lands secured to them by the
Title:  state; but they are daily disappearing, either by deaths or by removals to
Title:  scenes more congenial to their habits. In a short time there will be no
Title:  remains of these extraordinary people, in those regions in which they dwelt
Title:  for centuries, but their names. The state of New York has counties named
Title:  after all of them but the Mohawks and the Tuscaroras. The second river of
Title:  that state is called the Mohawk. 2 In the state of Rhode Island there is a
Title:  bay called Narragansett, so named after a powerful tribe of Indians, which
Title:  formerly dwelt on its banks. Accident, or one of those unaccountable freaks
Title:  which nature sometimes plays in the animal world, gave rise to a breed of
Title:  horses which were once well known in America, and distinguished by their
Title:  habit of pacing. Horses of this race were, and are still, in much request as
Title:  saddle horses, on account of their hardiness and the ease of their
Title:  movements. As they were also sure of foot, the Narragansetts were greatly
Title:  sought for by females who were obliged to travel over the roots and holes in
Title:  the new countries.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 3
Title:  
Title:       Before these fields were shorn and till'd,
Title:       Full to the brim our rivers flow'd;
Title:       The melody of waters fill'd
Title:       The fresh and boundless wood;
Title:       And torrents dash'd, and rivulets play'd,
Title:       And fountains spouted in the shade.
Title:  
Title:                                                                  BRYANT
Title:  
Title:  Leaving the unsuspecting Heyward and his confiding companions to penetrate
Title:  still deeper into a forest that contained such treacherous inmates, we must
Title:  use an author's privilege, and shift the scene a few miles to the westward
Title:  of the place where we have last seen them.
Title:  
Title:  On that day, two men were lingering on the banks of a small but rapid
Title:  stream, within an hour's journey of the encampment of Webb, like those who
Title:  awaited the appearance of an absent person, or the approach of some expected
Title:  event. The vast canopy of woods spread itself to the margin of the river,
Title:  overhanging the water, and shadowing its dark current with a deeper hue. The
Title:  rays of the sun were beginning to grow less fierce, and the intense heat of
Title:  the day was lessened, as the cooler vapors of the springs and fountains rose
Title:  above their leafy beds, and rested in the atmosphere. Still that breathing
Title:  silence, which marks the drowsy sultriness of an American landscape in July,
Title:  pervaded the secluded spot, interrupted only by the low voices of the men,
Title:  the occasional and lazy tap of a woodpecker, the discordant cry of some
Title:  gaudy jay, or a swelling on the ear, from the dull roar of a distant
Title:  waterfall. These feeble and broken sounds were, however, too familiar to the
Title:  foresters to draw their attention from the more interesting matter of their
Title:  dialogue. While one of these loiterers showed the red skin and wild
Title:  accounterments of a native of the woods, the other exhibited, through the
Title:  mask of his rude and nearly savage equipments, the brighter, though
Title:  sun-burned and long-faced complexion of one who might claim descent from a
Title:  European parentage. The former was seated on the end of a mossy log, in a
Title:  posture that permitted him to heighten the effect of his earnest language,
Title:  by the calm but expressive gestures of an Indian engaged in debate. his
Title:  body, which was nearly naked, presented a terrific emblem of death, drawn in
Title:  intermingled colors of white and black. His closely-shaved head, on which no
Title:  other hair than the well-known and chivalrous scalping tuft1 was preserved,
Title:  was without ornament of any kind, with the exception of a solitary eagle's
Title:  plume, that crossed his crown, and depended over the left shoulder. A
Title:  tomahawk and scalping knife, of English manufacture, were in his girdle;
Title:  while a short military rifle, of that sort with which the policy of the
Title:  whites armed their savage allies, lay carelessly across his bare and sinewy
Title:  knee. The expanded chest, full formed limbs, and grave countenance of this
Title:  warrior, would denote that he had reached the vigor of his days, though no
Title:  symptoms of decay appeared to have yet weakened his manhood.
Title:  
Title:  The frame of the white man, judging by such parts as were not concealed by
Title:  his clothes, was like that of one who had known hardships and exertion from
Title:  his earliest youth. His person, though muscular, was rather attenuated than
Title:  full; but every nerve and muscle appeared strung and indurated by unremitted
Title:  exposure and toil. He wore a hunting shirt of forest-green, fringed with
Title:  faded yellow,2 and a summer cap of skins which had been shorn of their fur.
Title:  He also bore a knife in a girdle of wampum, like that which confined the
Title:  scanty garments of the Indian, but no tomahawk. His moccasins were
Title:  ornamented after the gay fashion of the natives, while the only part of his
Title:  under dress which appeared below the hunging frock was a pair of buckskin
Title:  leggings, that laced at the sides, and which were gartered above the knees,
Title:  with the sinews of a deer. A pouch and horn completed his personal
Title:  accouterments, though a rifle of great length,3 which the theory of the more
Title:  ingenious whites had taught them was the most dangerous of all firearms,
Title:  leaned against a neighboring sapling. The eye of the hunter, or scout,
Title:  whichever he might be, was small, quick, keen, and restless, roving while he
Title:  spoke, on every side of him, as if in quest of game, or distrusting the
Title:  sudden approach of some lurking enemy. Notwithstanding the symptoms of
Title:  habitual suspicion, his countenance was not only without guile, but at the
Title:  moment at which he is introduced, it was charged with an expression of
Title:  sturdy honesty. Even your traditions make the case in my favor,
Title:  Chingachgook, he said, speaking in the tongue which was known to all the
Title:  natives who formerly inhabited the country between the Hudson and the
Title:  Potomac, and of which we shall give a free translation for the benefit of
Title:  the reader; endeavoring, at the same time, to preserve some of the
Title:  peculiarities, both of the individual and of the language. Your fathers came
Title:  from the setting sun, crossed the big river,4 fought the people of the
Title:  country, and took the land; and mine came from the red sky of the morning,
Title:  over the salt lake, and did their work much after the fashion that had been
Title:  set them by yours; then let God judge the matter between us, and friends
Title:  spare their words! My fathers fought with the naked red man! returned the
Title:  Indian, sternly, in the same language. Is there no difference, Hawkeye,
Title:  between the stone-headed arrow of the warrior, and the leaden bullet with
Title:  which you kill?
Title:  
Title:  There is reason in an Indian, though nature has made him with a red skin!
Title:  said the white man, shaking his head like one on whom such an appeal to his
Title:  justice was not thrown away. For a moment he appeared to be conscious of
Title:  having the worst of the argument, then, rallying again, he answered the
Title:  objection of his antagonist in the best manner his limited information would
Title:  allow:
Title:  
Title:  I am no scholar, and I care not who knows it; but, judging from what I have
Title:  seen, at deer chases and squirrel hunts, of the sparks below, I should think
Title:  a rifle in the hands of their grandfathers was not so dangerous as a hickory
Title:  bow and a good flint-head might be, if drawn with Indian judgment, and sent
Title:  by an Indian eye.
Title:  
Title:  You have the story told by your fathers, returned the other, coldly waving
Title:  his hand. What say your old men? Do they tell the young warriors that the
Title:  pale faces met the red men, painted for war and armed with the stone hatchet
Title:  and wooden gun?
Title:  
Title:  I am not a prejudiced man, nor one who vaunts himself on his natural
Title:  privileges, though the worst enemy I have on earth, and he is an Iroquois,
Title:  daren't deny that I am genuine white, the scout replied, surveying, with
Title:  secret satisfaction, the faded color of his bony and sinewy hand, and I am
Title:  willing to own that my people have many ways, of which, as an honest man, I
Title:  can't approve. It is one of their customs to write in books what they have
Title:  done and seen, instead of telling them in their villages, where the lie can
Title:  be given to the face of a cowardly boaster, and the brave soldier can call
Title:  on his comrades to witness for the truth of his words. In consequence of
Title:  this bad fashion, a man, who is too conscientious to misspend his days among
Title:  the women, in learning the names of black marks, may never hear of the deeds
Title:  of his fathers, nor feel a pride in striving to outdo them. For myself, I
Title:  conclude the Bumppos could shoot, for I have a natural turn with a rifle,
Title:  which must have been handed down from generation to generation, as, our holy
Title:  commandments tell us, all good and evil gifts are bestowed; though I should
Title:  be loath to answer for other people in such a matter. But every story has
Title:  its two sides; so I ask you, Chingachgook, what passed, according to the
Title:  traditions of the red men, when our fathers first met?
Title:  
Title:  A silence of a minute succeeded, during which the Indian sat mute; then,
Title:  full of the dignity of his office, he commenced his brief tale, with a
Title:  solemnity that served to heighten its appearance of truth.
Title:  
Title:  Listen, Hawkeye, and your ear shall drink no lie. 'Tis what my fathers have
Title:  said, and what the Mohicans have done. He hesitated a single instant, and
Title:  bending a cautious glance toward his companion, he continued, in a manner
Title:  that was divided between interrogation and assertion. Does not this stream
Title:  at our feet run toward the summer, until its waters grow salt, and the
Title:  current flows upward?
Title:  
Title:  It can't be denied that your traditions tell you true in both these matters,
Title:  said the white man; for I have been there, and have seen them, though why
Title:  water, which is so sweet in the shade, should become bitter in the sun, is
Title:  an alteration for which I have never been able to account.
Title:  
Title:  And the current! demanded the Indian, who expected his reply with that sort
Title:  of interest that a man feels in the confirmation of testimony, at which he
Title:  marvels even while he respects it; the fathers of Chingachgook have not
Title:  lied!
Title:  
Title:  The holy Bible is not more true, and that is the truest thing in nature.
Title:  They call this up-stream current the tide, which is a thing soon explained,
Title:  and clear enough. Six hours the waters run in, and six hours they run out,
Title:  and the reason is this: when there is higher water in the sea than in the
Title:  river, they run in until the river gets to be highest, and then it runs out
Title:  again.
Title:  
Title:  The waters in the woods, and on the great lakes, run downward until they lie
Title:  like my hand, said the Indian, stretching the limb horizontally before him,
Title:  and then they run no more.
Title:  
Title:  No honest man will deny it, said the scout, a little nettled at the implied
Title:  distrust of his explanation of the mystery of the tides; and I grant that it
Title:  is true on the small scale, and where the land is level. But everything
Title:  depends on what scale you look at things. Now, on the small scale, the 'arth
Title:  is level; but on the large scale it is round. In this manner, pools and
Title:  ponds, and even the great fresh-water lakes, may be stagnant, as you and I
Title:  both know they are, having seen them; but when you come to spread water over
Title:  a great tract, like the sea, where the earth is round, how in reason can the
Title:  water be quiet? You might as well expect the river to lie still on the brink
Title:  of those black rocks a mile above us, though your own ears tell you that it
Title:  is tumbling over them at this very moment.
Title:  
Title:  If unsatisfied by the philosophy of his companion, the Indian was far too
Title:  dignified to betray his unbelief. He listened like one who was convinced,
Title:  and resumed his narrative in his former solemn manner.
Title:  
Title:  We came from the place where the sun is hid at night, over great plains
Title:  where the buffaloes live, until we reached the big river. There we fought
Title:  the Alligewi, till the ground was red with their blood. From the banks of
Title:  the big river to the shores of the salt lake, there was none to meet us. The
Title:  Maquas followed at a distance. We said the country should be ours from the
Title:  place where the water runs up no longer on this stream, to a river twenty
Title:  sun's journey toward the summer. We drove the Maquas into the woods with the
Title:  bears. They only tasted salt at the licks; they drew no fish from the great
Title:  lake; we threw them the bones.
Title:  
Title:  All this I have heard and believe, said the white man, observing that the
Title:  Indian paused; but it was long before the English came into the country.
Title:  
Title:  A pine grew then where this chestnut now stands. The first pale faces who
Title:  came among us spoke no English. They came in a large canoe, when my fathers
Title:  had buried the tomahawk with the red men around them. Then, Hawkeye, he
Title:  continued, betraying his deep emotion, only by permitting his voice to fall
Title:  to those low, guttural tones, which render his language, as spoken at times,
Title:  so very musical; then, Hawkeye, we were one people, and we were happy. The
Title:  salt lake gave us its fish, the wood its deer, and the air its birds. We
Title:  took wives who bore us children; we worshipped the Great Spirit; and we kept
Title:  the Maquas beyond the sound of our songs of triumph.
Title:  
Title:  Know you anything of your own family at that time? demanded the white. But
Title:  you are just a man, for an Indian; and as I suppose you hold their gifts,
Title:  your fathers must have been brave warriors, and wise men at the
Title:  council-fire.
Title:  
Title:  My tribe is the grandfather of nations, but I am an unmixed man. The blood
Title:  of chiefs is in my veins, where it must stay forever. The Dutch landed, and
Title:  gave my people the fire-water; they drank until the heavens and the earth
Title:  seemed to meet, and they foolishly thought they had found the Great Spirit.
Title:  Then they parted with their land. Foot by foot, they were driven back from
Title:  the shores, until I, that am a chief and a Sagamore, have never seen the sun
Title:  shine but through the trees, and have never visited the graves of my
Title:  fathers.
Title:  
Title:  Graves bring solemn feelings over the mind, returned the scout, a good deal
Title:  touched at the calm suffering of his companion; and they often aid a man in
Title:  his good intentions; though, for myself, I expect to leave my own bones
Title:  unburied, to bleach in the woods, or to be torn asunder by the wolves. But
Title:  where are to be found those of your race who came to their kin in the
Title:  Delaware country, so many summers since?
Title:  
Title:  Where are the blossoms of those summers! - fallen, one by one; so all of my
Title:  family departed, each in his turn, to the land of spirits. I am on the
Title:  hilltop and must go down into the valley; and when Uncas follows in my
Title:  footsteps there will no longer be any of the blood of the Sagamores, for my
Title:  boy is the last of the Mohicans.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas is here, said another voice, in the same soft, guttural tones, near
Title:  his elbow; who speaks to Uncas?
Title:  
Title:  The white man loosened his knife in his leathern sheath, and made an
Title:  involuntary movement of the hand toward his rifle, at this sudden
Title:  interruption; but the Indian sat composed, and without turning his head at
Title:  the unexpected sounds.
Title:  
Title:  At the next instant, a youthful warrior passed between them, with a
Title:  noiseless step, and seated himself on the bank of the rapid stream. No
Title:  exclamation of surprise escaped the father, nor was any question asked, or
Title:  reply given, for several minutes; each appearing to await the moment when he
Title:  might speak, without betraying womanish curiosity or childish impatience.
Title:  The white man seemed to take counsel from their customs, and, relinquishing
Title:  his grasp of the rifle, he also remained silent and reserved. At length
Title:  Chingachgook turned his eyes slowly toward his son, and demanded:
Title:  
Title:  Do the Maquas dare to leave the print of their moccasins in these woods?
Title:  
Title:  I have been on their trail, replied the young Indian, and know that they
Title:  number as many as the fingers of my two hands; but they lie hid like
Title:  cowards.
Title:  
Title:  The thieves are outlying for scalps and plunder, said the white man, whom we
Title:  shall call Hawkeye, after the manner of his companions. That busy Frenchman,
Title:  Montcalm, will send his spies into our very camp, but he will know what road
Title:  we travel!
Title:  
Title:  'Tis enough, returned the father, glancing his eye toward the setting sun;
Title:  they shall be driven like deer from their bushes. Hawkeye, let us eat
Title:  to-night, and show the Maquas that we are men to-morrow.
Title:  
Title:  I am as ready to do the one as the other; but to fight the Iroquois 'tis
Title:  necessary to find the skulkers; and to eat, 'tis necessary to get the game -
Title:  talk of the devil and he will come; there is a pair of the biggest antlers I
Title:  have seen this season, moving the bushes below the hill! Now, Uncas, he
Title:  continued, in a half whisper, and laughing with a kind of inward sound, like
Title:  one who had learned to be watchful, I will bet my charger three times full
Title:  of powder, against a foot of wampum, that I take him atwixt the eyes, and
Title:  nearer to the right than to the left.
Title:  
Title:  It cannot be! said the young Indian, springing to his feet with youthful
Title:  eagerness; all but the tips of his horns are hid!
Title:  
Title:  He's a boy! said the white man, shaking his head while he spoke, and
Title:  addressing the father. Does he think when a hunter sees a part of the
Title:  creatur, he can't tell where the rest of him should be!
Title:  
Title:  Adjusting his rifle, he was about to make an exhibition of that skill on
Title:  which he so much valued himself, when the warrior struck up the piece with
Title:  his hand, saying:
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye! will you fight the Maquas?
Title:  
Title:  These Indians know the nature of the woods, as it might be by instinct!
Title:  returned the scout, dropping his rifle, and turning away like a man who was
Title:  convinced of his error. I must leave the buck to your arrow, Uncas, or we
Title:  may kill a deer for them thieves, the Iroquois, to eat.
Title:  
Title:  The instant the father seconded this intimation by an expressive gesture of
Title:  the hand, Uncas threw himself on the ground, and approached the animal with
Title:  wary movements. When within a few yards of the cover, he fitted an arrow to
Title:  his bow with the utmost care, while the antlers moved, as if their owner
Title:  snuffed an enemy in the tainted air. In another moment the twang of the cord
Title:  was heard, a white streak was seen glancing into the bushes, and the wounded
Title:  buck plunged from the cover, to the very feet of his hidden enemy. Avoiding
Title:  the horns of the infuriated animal, Uncas darted to his side, and passed his
Title:  knife across the throat, when bounding to the edge of the river it fell,
Title:  dyeing the waters with its blood.
Title:  
Title:  'Twas done with Indian skill, said the scout laughing inwardly, but with
Title:  vast satisfaction; and 'twas a pretty sight to behold! Though an arrow is a
Title:  near shot, and needs a knife to finish the work.
Title:  
Title:  Hugh! ejaculated his companion, turning quickly, like a hound who scented
Title:  game.
Title:  
Title:  By the Lord, there is a drove of them! exclaimed the scout, whose eyes began
Title:  to glisten with the ardor of his usual occupation; if they come within range
Title:  of a bullet I will drop one, though the whole Six Nations should be lurking
Title:  within sound! What do you hear, Chingachgook? for to my ears the woods are
Title:  dumb.
Title:  
Title:  There is but one deer, and he is dead, said the Indian, bending his body
Title:  till his ear nearly touched the earth. I hear the sounds of feet!
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps the wolves have driven the buck to shelter, and are following on his
Title:  trail.
Title:  
Title:  No. The horses of white men are coming! returned the other, raising himself
Title:  with dignity, and resuming his seat on the log with his former composure.
Title:  Hawkeye, they are your brothers; speak to them.
Title:  
Title:  That I will, and in English that the king needn't be ashamed to answer,
Title:  returned the hunter, speaking in the language of which he boasted; but I see
Title:  nothing, nor do I hear the sounds of man or beast; 'tis strange that an
Title:  Indian should understand white sounds better than a man who, his very
Title:  enemies will own, has no cross in his blood, although he may have lived with
Title:  the red skins long enough to be suspected! Ha! there goes something like the
Title:  cracking of a dry stick, too - now I hear the bushes move - yes, yes, there
Title:  is a trampling that I mistook for the falls - and - but here they come
Title:  themselves; God keep them from the Iroquois!
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 The North American warrior caused the hair to be plucked from his whole
Title:  body; a small tuft was left on the crown of his head, in order that his
Title:  enemy might avail himself of it, in wrenching off the scalp in the event of
Title:  his fall. The scalp was the only admissible trophy of victory. Thus, it was
Title:  deemed more important to obtain the scalp than to kill the man. Some tribes
Title:  lay great stress on the honor of striking a dead body. These practices have
Title:  nearly disappeared among the Indians of the Atlantic states.
Title:  
Title:  2 The hunting-shirt is a picturesque smock-frock, being shorter, and
Title:  ornamented with fringes and tassels. The colors are intended to imitate the
Title:  hues of the wood, with a view to concealment. Many corps of American
Title:  riflemen have been thus attired, and the dress is one of the most striking
Title:  of modern times. The hunting-shirt is frequently white.
Title:  
Title:  3 The rifle of the army is short; that of the hunter is always long.
Title:  
Title:  4 The Mississippi. The scout alludes to a tradition which is very popular
Title:  among the tribes of the Atlantic states. Evidence of their Asiatic origin is
Title:  deduced from the circumstances, though great uncertainty hangs over the
Title:  whole history of the Indians.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 4
Title:  
Title:       Well go thy way: thou shalt not from this grove
Title:       Till I torment thee for this injury.
Title:  
Title:                                                MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.
Title:  
Title:  The words were still in the mouth of the scout, when the leader of the
Title:  party, whose approaching footsteps had caught the vigilant ear of the
Title:  Indian, came openly into view. A beaten path, such as those made by the
Title:  periodical passage of the deer, wound through a little glen at no great
Title:  distance, and struck the river at the point where the white man and his red
Title:  companions had posted themselves. Along this track the travelers, who had
Title:  produced a surprise so unusual in the depths of the forest, advanced slowly
Title:  toward the hunter, who was in front of his associates, in readiness to
Title:  receive them.
Title:  
Title:  Who comes? demanded the scout, throwing his rifle carelessly across his left
Title:  arm, and keeping the forefinger of his right hand on the trigger, though he
Title:  avoided all appearance of menace in the act. Who comes hither, among the
Title:  beasts and dangers of the wilderness?
Title:  
Title:  Believers in religion, and friends to the law and to the king, returned he
Title:  who rode foremost. Men who have journeyed since the rising sun, in the
Title:  shades of this forest, without nourishment, and are sadly tired of their
Title:  wayfaring.
Title:  
Title:  You are, then, lost, interrupted the hunter, and have found how helpless
Title:  'tis not to know whether to take the right hand or the left?
Title:  
Title:  Even so; sucking babes are not more dependent on those who guide them than
Title:  we who are of larger growth, and who may now be said to possess the stature
Title:  without the knowledge of men. Know you the distance to a post of the crown
Title:  called William Henry?
Title:  
Title:  Hoot! shouted the scout, who did not spare his open laughter, though
Title:  instantly checking the dangerous sounds he indulged his merriment at less
Title:  risk of being overheard by any lurking enemies. You are as much off the
Title:  scent as a hound would be, with Horican atwixt him and the deer! William
Title:  Henry, man! if you are friends to the king and have business with the army,
Title:  your way would be to follow the river down to Edward, and lay the matter
Title:  before Webb, who tarries there, instead of pushing into the defiles, and
Title:  driving this saucy Frenchman back across Champlain, into his den again.
Title:  
Title:  Before the stranger could make any reply to this unexpected proposition,
Title:  another horseman dashed the bushes aside, and leaped his charger into the
Title:  pathway, in front of his companion.
Title:  
Title:  What, then, may be our distance from Fort Edward? demanded a new speaker;
Title:  the place you advise us to seek we left this morning, and our destination is
Title:  the head of the lake.
Title:  
Title:  Then you must have lost your eyesight afore losing your way, for the road
Title:  across the portage is cut to a good two rods, and is as grand a path, I
Title:  calculate, as any that runs into London, or even before the palace of the
Title:  king himself.
Title:  
Title:  We will not dispute concerning the excellence of the passage, returned
Title:  Heyward, smiling; for, as the reader has anticipated, it was he. It is
Title:  enough, for the present, that we trusted to an Indian guide to take us by a
Title:  nearer, though blinder path, and that we are deceived in his knowledge. In
Title:  plain words, we know not where we are.
Title:  
Title:  An Indian lost in the woods! said the scout, shaking his head doubtingly;
Title:  When the sun is scorching the tree tops, and the water courses are full;
Title:  when the moss on every beech he sees will tell him in what quarter the north
Title:  star will shine at night. The woods are full of deer-paths which run to the
Title:  streams and licks, places well known to everybody; nor have the geese done
Title:  their flight to the Canada waters altogether! 'Tis strange that an Indian
Title:  should be lost atwixt Horican and the bend in the river! Is he a Mohawk?
Title:  
Title:  Not by birth, though adopted in that tribe; I think his birthplace was
Title:  farther north, and he is one of those you call a Huron.
Title:  
Title:  Hugh! exclaimed the two companions of the scout, who had continued until
Title:  this part of the dialogue, seated immovable, and apparently indifferent to
Title:  what passed, but who now sprang to their feet with an activity and interest
Title:  that had evidently got the better of their reserve by surprise.
Title:  
Title:  A Huron! repeated the sturdy scout, once more shaking his head in open
Title:  distrust; they are a thievish race, nor do I care by whom they are adopted;
Title:  you can never make anything of them but skulls and vagabonds. Since you
Title:  trusted yourself to the care of one of that nation, I only wonder that you
Title:  have not fallen in with more.
Title:  
Title:  Of that there is little danger, since William Henry is so many miles in our
Title:  front. You forget that I have told you our guide is now a Mohawk, and that
Title:  he serves with our forces as a friend.
Title:  
Title:  And I tell you that he who is born a Mingo will die a Mingo, returned the
Title:  other positively. A Mohawk! No, give me a Delaware or a Mohican for honesty;
Title:  and when they will fight, which they won't all do, having suffered their
Title:  cunning enemies, the Maquas, to make them women - but when they will fight
Title:  at all, look to a Delaware, or a Mohican, for a warrior!
Title:  
Title:  Enough of this, said Heyward, impatiently; I wish not to inquire into the
Title:  character of a man that I know, and to whom you must be a stranger. You have
Title:  not yet answered my question; what is our distance from the main army at
Title:  Edward?
Title:  
Title:  It seems that may depend on who is your guide. One would think such a horse
Title:  as that might get over a good deal of ground atwixt sun-up and sun-down.
Title:  
Title:  I wish no contention of idle words with you, friend, said Heyward, curbing
Title:  his dissatisfied manner, and speaking in a more gentle voice; if you will
Title:  tell me the distance to Fort Edward, and conduct me thither, your labor
Title:  shall not go without its reward.
Title:  
Title:  And in so doing, how know I that I don't guide an enemy and a spy of
Title:  Montcalm, to the works of the army? It is not every man who can speak the
Title:  English tongue that is an honest subject.
Title:  
Title:  If you serve with the troops, of whom I judge you to be a scout, you should
Title:  know of such a regiment of the king as the Sixtieth.
Title:  
Title:  The Sixtieth! you can tell me little of the Royal Americans that I don't
Title:  know, though I do wear a hunting-shirt instead of a scarlet jacket.
Title:  
Title:  Well, then, among other things, you may know the name of its major?
Title:  
Title:  Its major! interrupted the hunter, elevating his body like one who was proud
Title:  of his trust. If there is a man in the country who knows Major Effingham, he
Title:  stands before you.
Title:  
Title:  It is a corps which has many majors; the gentleman your name is the senior,
Title:  but I speak of the junior of them all; he who commands the companies in
Title:  garrison at William Henry.
Title:  
Title:  Yes, yes, I have heard that a young gentleman of vast riches, from one of
Title:  the provinces far south, has got the place. He is over young, too, to hold
Title:  such rank, and to be put above men whose heads are beginning to bleach; and
Title:  yet they say he is a soldier in his knowledge, and a gallant gentleman!
Title:  
Title:  Whatever he may be, or however he may be qualified for his rank, he now
Title:  speaks to you and, of course, can be no enemy to dread.
Title:  
Title:  The scout regarded Heyward in surprise, and then lifting his cap, he
Title:  answered, in a tone less confident than before - though still expressing
Title:  doubt.
Title:  
Title:  I have heard a party was to leave the encampment this morning for the lake
Title:  shore?
Title:  
Title:  You have heard the truth; but I preferred a nearer route, trusting to the
Title:  knowledge of the Indian I mentioned.
Title:  
Title:  And he deceived you, and then deserted?
Title:  
Title:  Neither, as I believe; certainly not the latter, for he is to be found in
Title:  the rear.
Title:  
Title:  I should like to look at the creatur'; if it is a true Iroquois I can tell
Title:  him by his knavish look, and by his paint, said the scout; stepping past the
Title:  charger of Heyward, and entering the path behind the mare of the singing
Title:  master, whose foal had taken advantage of the halt to exact the maternal
Title:  contribution. After shoving aside the bushes, and proceeding a few paces, he
Title:  encountered the females, who awaited the result of the conference with
Title:  anxiety, and not entirely without apprehension. Behind these, the runner
Title:  leaned against a tree, where he stood the close examination of the scout
Title:  with an air unmoved, though with a look so dark and savage, that it might in
Title:  itself excite fear. Satisfied with his scrutiny, the hunter soon left him.
Title:  As he repassed the females, he paused a moment to gaze upon their beauty,
Title:  answering to the smile and nod of Alice with a look of open pleasure. Thence
Title:  he went to the side of the motherly animal, and spending a minute in a
Title:  fruitless inquiry into the character of her rider, he shook his head and
Title:  returned to Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  A Mingo is a Mingo, and God having made him so, neither the Mohawks nor any
Title:  other tribe can alter him, he said, when he had regained his former
Title:  position. If we were alone, and you would leave that noble horse at the
Title:  mercy of the wolves to-night, I could show you the way to Edward myself,
Title:  within an hour, for it lies only about an hour's journey hence; but with
Title:  such ladies in your company 'tis impossible!
Title:  
Title:  And why? They are fatigued, but they are quite equal to a ride of a few more
Title:  miles.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis a natural impossibility! repeated the scout; I wouldn't walk a mile in
Title:  these woods after night gets into them, in company with that runner, for the
Title:  best rifle in the colonies. They are full of outlying Iroquois, and your
Title:  mongrel Mohawk knows where to find them too well to be my companion.
Title:  
Title:  Think you so? said Heyward, leaning forward in the saddle, and dropping his
Title:  voice nearly to a whisper; I confess I have not been without my own
Title:  suspicions, though I have endeavored to conceal them, and affected a
Title:  confidence I have not always felt, on account of my companions. It was
Title:  because I suspected him that I would follow no longer; making him, as you
Title:  see, follow me.
Title:  
Title:  I knew he was one of the cheats as soon as I laid eyes on him! returned the
Title:  scout, placing a finger on his nose, in sign of caution.
Title:  
Title:  The thief is leaning against the foot of the sugar sapling, that you can see
Title:  over them bushes; his right leg is in a line with the bark of the tree, and,
Title:  tapping his rifle, I can take him from where I stand, between the angle and
Title:  the knee, with a single shot, putting an end to his tramping through the
Title:  woods, for at least a month to come. If I should go back to him, the cunning
Title:  varmint would suspect something, and be dodging through the trees like a
Title:  frightened deer.
Title:  
Title:  It will not do. He may be innocent, and I dislike the act. Though, if I felt
Title:  confident of his treachery - -
Title:  
Title:  'Tis a safe thing to calculate on the knavery of an Iroquois, said the
Title:  scout, throwing his rifle forward, by a sort of instinctive movement.
Title:  
Title:  Hold! interrupted Heyward, it will not do - we must think of some other
Title:  scheme - and yet, I have much reason to believe the rascal has deceived me.
Title:  
Title:  The hunter, who had already abandoned his intention of maiming the runner,
Title:  mused a moment, and then made a gesture, which instantly brought his two red
Title:  companions to his side. They spoke together earnestly in the Delaware
Title:  language, though in an undertone; and by the gestures of the white man,
Title:  which were frequently directed towards the top of the sapling, it was
Title:  evident he pointed out the situation of their hidden enemy. His companions
Title:  were not long in comprehending his wishes, and laying aside their firearms,
Title:  they parted, taking opposite sides of the path, and burying themselves in
Title:  the thicket, with such cautious movements, that their steps were inaudible.
Title:  
Title:  Now, go you back, said the hunter, speaking again to Heyward, and hold the
Title:  imp in talk; these Mohicans here will take him without breaking his paint.
Title:  
Title:  Nay, said Heyward, proudly, I will seize him myself.
Title:  
Title:  Hist! what could you do, mounted, against an Indian in the bushes!
Title:  
Title:  I will dismount.
Title:  
Title:  And, think you, when he saw one of your feet out of the stirrup, he would
Title:  wait for the other to be free? Whoever comes into the woods to deal with the
Title:  natives, must use Indian fashions, if he would wish to prosper in his
Title:  undertakings. Go, then; talk openly to the miscreant, and seem to believe
Title:  him the truest friend you have on 'arth.
Title:  
Title:  xx Heyward prepared to comply, though with strong disgust at the nature of
Title:  the office he was compelled to execute. Each moment, however, pressed upon
Title:  him a conviction of the critical situation in which he had suffered his
Title:  invaluable trust to be involved through his own confidence. The sun had
Title:  already disappeared, and the woods, suddenly deprived of his light,1 were
Title:  assuming a dusky hue, which keenly reminded him that the hour the savage
Title:  usually chose for his most barbarous and remorseless acts of vengeance or
Title:  hostility, was speedily drawing near. Stimulated by apprehension, he left
Title:  the scout, who immediately entered into a loud conversation with the
Title:  stranger that had so unceremoniously enlisted himself in the party of
Title:  travelers that morning. In passing his gentler companions Heyward uttered a
Title:  few words of encouragement, and was pleased to find that, though fatigued
Title:  with the exercise of the day, they appeared to entertain no suspicion that
Title:  their present embarrassment was other than the result of accident. Giving
Title:  them reason to believe he was merely employed in a consultation concerning
Title:  the future route, he spurred his charger, and drew the reins again when the
Title:  animal had carried him within a few yards of the place where the sullen
Title:  runner still stood, leaning against the tree. You may see, Magua, he said,
Title:  endeavoring to assume an air of freedom and confidence, that the night is
Title:  closing around us, and yet we are no nearer to William Henry than when we
Title:  left the encampment of Webb with the rising sun. You have missed the way,
Title:  nor have I been more fortunate. But, happily, we have fallen in with a
Title:  hunter, he whom you hear talking to the singer, that is acquainted with the
Title:  deerpaths and by-ways of the woods, and who promises to lead us to a place
Title:  where we may rest securely till the morning.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian riveted his glowing eyes on Heyward as he asked, in his imperfect
Title:  English, Is he alone?
Title:  
Title:  Alone! hesitatingly answered Heyward, to whom deception was too new to be
Title:  assumed without embarrassment. Oh! not alone, surely, Magua, for you know
Title:  that we are with him.
Title:  
Title:  Then Le Renard Subtil will go, returned the runner, coolly raising his
Title:  little wallet from the place where it had lain at his feet; and the pale
Title:  faces will see none but their own color.
Title:  
Title:  Go! Whom call you Le Renard?
Title:  
Title:  'Tis the name his Canada fathers have given to Magua, returned the runner,
Title:  with an air that manifested his pride at the distinction. Night is the same
Title:  as day to Le Subtil, when Munro waits for him.
Title:  
Title:  And what account will Le Renard give the chief of William Henry concerning
Title:  his daughters? Will he dare to tell the hot-blooded Scotsman that his
Title:  children are left without a guide, though Magua promised to be one?
Title:  
Title:  Though the gray head has a loud voice, and a long arm, Le Renard will not
Title:  hear him, nor feel him, in the woods.
Title:  
Title:  But what will the Mohawks say? They will make him petticoats, and bid him
Title:  stay in the wigwam with the women, for he is no longer to be trusted with
Title:  the business of a man.
Title:  
Title:  Le Subtil knows the path to the great lakes, and he can find the bones of
Title:  his fathers, was the answer of the unmoved runner.
Title:  
Title:  Enough, Magua, said Heyward; are we not friends? Why should there be bitter
Title:  words between us? Munro has promised you a gift for your services when
Title:  performed, and I shall be your debtor for another. Rest your weary limbs,
Title:  then, and open your wallet to eat. We have a few moments to spare; let us
Title:  not waste them in talk like wrangling women. When the ladies are refreshed
Title:  we will proceed.
Title:  
Title:  The pale faces make themselves dogs to their women, muttered the Indian, in
Title:  his native language, and when they want to eat, their warriors must lay
Title:  aside the tomahawk to feed their laziness.
Title:  
Title:  What say you, Renard?
Title:  
Title:  Le Subtil says it is good.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian then fastened his eyes keenly on the open countenance of Heyward,
Title:  but meeting his glance, he turned them quickly away, and seating himself
Title:  deliberately on the ground, he drew forth the remnant of some former repast,
Title:  and began to eat, though not without first bending his looks slowly and
Title:  cautiously around him.
Title:  
Title:  This is well, continued Heyward; and Le Renard will have strength and sight
Title:  to find the path in the morning; he paused, for sounds like the snapping of
Title:  a dried stick, and the rustling of leaves, rose from the adjacent bushes,
Title:  but recollecting himself instantly, he continued, we must be moving before
Title:  the sun is seen, or Montcalm may lie in our path, and shut us out from the
Title:  fortress.
Title:  
Title:  The hand of Magua dropped from his mouth to his side, and though his eyes
Title:  were fastened on the ground, his head was turned aside, his nostrils
Title:  expanded, and his ears seemed even to stand more erect than usual, giving to
Title:  him the appearance of a statue that was made to represent intense attention.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, who watched his movements with a vigilant eye, carelessly
Title:  extricated one of his feet from the stirrup, while he passed a hand toward
Title:  the bear-skin covering of his holsters. Every effort to detect the point
Title:  most regarded by the runner was completely frustrated by the tremulous
Title:  glances of his organs, which seemed not to rest a single instant on any
Title:  particular object, and which, at the same time, could be hardly said to
Title:  move. While he hesitated how to proceed, Le Subtil cautiously raised himself
Title:  to his feet, though with a motion so slow and guarded, that not the
Title:  slightest noise was produced by the change. Heyward felt it had now become
Title:  incumbent on him to act. Throwing his leg over the saddle, he dismounted,
Title:  with a determination to advance and seize his treacherous companion,
Title:  trusting the result to his own manhood. In order, however, to prevent
Title:  unnecessary alarm, he still preserved an air of calmness and friendship.
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard Subtil does not eat, he said, using the appellation he had found
Title:  most flattering to the vanity of the Indian. His corn is not well parched,
Title:  and it seems dry. Let me examine; perhaps something may be found among my
Title:  own provisions that will help his appetite.
Title:  
Title:  Magua held out the wallet to the proffer of the other. He even suffered
Title:  their hands to meet, without betraying the least emotion, or varying his
Title:  riveted attitude of attention. But when he felt the fingers of Heyward
Title:  moving gently along his own naked arm, he struck up the limb of the young
Title:  man, and, uttering a piercing cry, he darted beneath it, and plunged, at a
Title:  single bound, into the opposite thicket. At the next instant the form of
Title:  Chingachgook appeared from the bushes, looking like a specter in its paint,
Title:  and glided across the path in swift pursuit. Next followed the shout of
Title:  Uncas, when the woods were lighted by a sudden flash, that was accompanied
Title:  by the sharp report of the hunter's rifle.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 The scene of this tale was in the 42d degree of latitude, where the
Title:  twilight is never of long continuation.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 5
Title:  
Title:       ...In such a night
Title:       Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew;
Title:       And saw the lion's shadow ere himself.
Title:  
Title:                                                      MERCHANT OF VENICE
Title:  
Title:  The suddenness of the flight of his guide, and the wild cries of the
Title:  pursuers, caused Heyward to remain fixed, for a few moments, in inactive
Title:  surprise. Then recollecting the importance of securing the fugitive, he
Title:  dashed aside the surrounding bushes, and pressed eagerly forward to lend his
Title:  aid in the chase. Before he had, however, proceeded a hundred yards, he met
Title:  the three foresters already returning from their unsuccessful pursuit.
Title:  
Title:  Why so soon disheartened! he exclaimed; the scoundrel must be concealed
Title:  behind some of these trees, and may yet be secured. We are not safe while he
Title:  goes at large.
Title:  
Title:  Would you set a cloud to chase the wind? returned the disappointed scout; I
Title:  heard the imp brushing over the dry leaves, like a black snake, and blinking
Title:  a glimpse of him, just over ag'in yon big pine, I pulled as it might be on
Title:  the scent; but 'twouldn't do! and yet for a reasoning aim, if anybody but
Title:  myself had touched the trigger, I should call it a quick sight; and I may be
Title:  accounted to have experience in these matters, and one who ought to know.
Title:  Look at this sumach; its leaves are red, though everybody knows the fruit is
Title:  in the yellow blossom in the month of July!
Title:  
Title:  'Tis the blood of Le Subtil! he is hurt, and may yet fall!
Title:  
Title:  No, no, returned the scout, in decided disapprobation of this opinion, I
Title:  rubbed the bark off a limb, perhaps, but the creature leaped the longer for
Title:  it. A rifle bullet acts on a running animal, when it barks him, much the
Title:  same as one of your spurs on a horse; that is, it quickens motion, and puts
Title:  life into the flesh, instead of taking it away. But when it cuts the ragged
Title:  hole, after a bound or two, there is, commonly, a stagnation of further
Title:  leaping, be it Indian or be it deer!
Title:  
Title:  We are four able bodies, to one wounded man!
Title:  
Title:  Is life grievous to you? interrupted the scout. Yonder red devil would draw
Title:  you within swing of the tomahawks of his comrades, before you were heated in
Title:  the chase. It was an unthoughtful act in a man who has so often slept with
Title:  the war-whoop ringing in the air, to let off his piece within sound of an
Title:  ambushment! But then it was a natural temptation! 'twas very natural! Come,
Title:  friends, let us move our station, and in such fashion, too, as will throw
Title:  the cunning of a Mingo on a wrong scent, or our scalps will be drying in the
Title:  wind in front of Montcalm's marquee, ag'in this hour to-morrow.
Title:  
Title:  This appalling declaration, which the scout uttered with the cool assurance
Title:  of a man who fully comprehended, while he did not fear to face the danger,
Title:  served to remind Heyward of the importance of the charge with which he
Title:  himself had been intrusted. Glancing his eyes around, with a vain effort to
Title:  pierce the gloom that was thickening beneath the leafy arches of the forest,
Title:  he felt as if, cut off from human aid, his unresisting companions would soon
Title:  lie at the entire mercy of those barbarous enemies, who, like beasts of
Title:  prey, only waited till the gathering darkness might render their blows more
Title:  fatally certain. His awakened imagination, deluded by the deceptive light,
Title:  converted each waving bush, or the fragment of some fallen tree, into human
Title:  forms, and twenty times he fancied he could distinguish the horrid visages
Title:  of his lurking foes, peering from their hiding places, in never ceasing
Title:  watchfulness of the movements of his party. Looking upward, he found that
Title:  the thin fleecy clouds, which evening had painted on the blue sky, were
Title:  already losing their faintest tints of rose-color, while the imbedded
Title:  stream, which glided past the spot where he stood, was to be traced only by
Title:  the dark boundary of its wooded banks.
Title:  
Title:  What is to be done! he said, feeling the utter helplessness of doubt in such
Title:  a pressing strait; desert me not, for God's sake! remain to defend those I
Title:  escort, and freely name your own reward!
Title:  
Title:  His companions, who conversed apart in the language of their tribe, heeded
Title:  not this sudden and earnest appeal. Though their dialogue was maintained in
Title:  low and cautious sounds, but little above a whisper, Heyward, who now
Title:  approached, could easily distinguish the earnest tones of the younger
Title:  warrior from the more deliberate speeches of his seniors. It was evident
Title:  that they debated on the propriety of some measure, that nearly concerned
Title:  the welfare of the travelers. Yielding to his powerful interest in the
Title:  subject, and impatient of a delay that seemed fraught with so much
Title:  additional danger, Heyward drew still nigher to the dusky group, with an
Title:  intention of making his offers of compensation more definite, when the white
Title:  man, motioning with his hand, as if he conceded the disputed point, turned
Title:  away, saying in a sort of solilquy, and in the English tongue:
Title:  
Title:  Uncas is right! it would not be the act of men to leave such harmless things
Title:  to their fate, even though it breaks up the harboring place forever. If you
Title:  would save these tender blossoms from the fangs of the worst of sarpents,
Title:  gentleman, you have neither time to lose nor resolution to throw away!
Title:  
Title:  How can such a wish be doubted! Have I not already offered - -
Title:  
Title:  Offer your prayers to Him who can give us wisdom to circumvent the cunning
Title:  of the devils who fill these woods, calmly interrupted the scout, but spare
Title:  your offers of money, which neither you may live to realize, nor I to profit
Title:  by. These Mohicans and I will do what man's thoughts can invent, to keep
Title:  such flowers, which, though so sweet, were never made for the wilderness,
Title:  from harm, and that without hope of any other recompense but such as God
Title:  always gives to upright dealings. First, you must promise two things, both
Title:  in your own name and for your friends, or without serving you we shall only
Title:  injure ourselves!
Title:  
Title:  Name them.
Title:  
Title:  The one is, to be still as these sleeping woods, let what will happen and
Title:  the other is, to keep the place where we shall take you, forever a secret
Title:  from all mortal men.
Title:  
Title:  I will do my utmost to see both these conditions fulfilled.
Title:  
Title:  Then follow, for we are losing moments that are as precious as the heart's
Title:  blood to a stricken deer!
Title:  
Title:  Heyward could distinguish the impatient gesture of the scout, through the
Title:  increasing shadows of the evening, and he moved in his footsteps, swiftly,
Title:  toward the place where he had left the remainder of the party. When they
Title:  rejoined the expecting and anxious females, he briefly acquainted them with
Title:  the conditions of their new guide, and with the necessity that existed for
Title:  their hushing every apprehension in instant and serious exertions. Although
Title:  his alarming communication was not received without much secret terror by
Title:  the listeners, his earnest and impressive manner, aided perhaps by the
Title:  nature of the danger, succeeded in bracing their nerves to undergo some
Title:  unlooked-for and unusual trial. Silently, and without a moment's delay, they
Title:  permitted him to assist them from their saddles, and when they descended
Title:  quickly to the water's edge, where the scout had collected the rest of the
Title:  party, more by the agency of expressive gestures than by any use of words.
Title:  
Title:  What to do with these dumb creatures! muttered the white man, on whom the
Title:  sole control of their future movements appeared to devolve; it would be time
Title:  lost to cut their throats, and cast them into the river; and to leave them
Title:  here would be to tell the Mingoes that they have not far to seek to find
Title:  their owners!
Title:  
Title:  Then give them their bridles, and let them range the woods, Heyward ventured
Title:  to suggest.
Title:  
Title:  No; it would be better to mislead the imps, and make them believe they must
Title:  equal a horse's speed to run down their chase. Ay, ay, that will blind their
Title:  fireballs of eyes! Chingach - Hist! what stirs the bush?
Title:  
Title:  The colt.
Title:  
Title:  That colt, at least, must die, muttered the scout, grasping at the mane of
Title:  the nimble beast, which easily eluded his hand; Uncas, your arrows!
Title:  
Title:  Hold! exclaimed the proprietor of the condemned animal, aloud, without
Title:  regard to the whispering tones used by the others; spare the foal of Miriam!
Title:  it is the comely offspring of a faithful dam, and would willingly injure
Title:  naught.
Title:  
Title:  When men struggle for the single life God has given them, said the scout,
Title:  sternly, even their own kind seem no more than the beasts of the wood. If
Title:  you speak again, I shall leave you to the mercy of the Maquas! Draw to your
Title:  arrow's head, Uncas; we have no time for second blows.
Title:  
Title:  The low, muttering sounds of his threatening voice were still audible, when
Title:  the wounded foal, first rearing on its hinder legs, plunged forward to its
Title:  knees. It was met by Chingachgook, whose knife passed across its throat
Title:  quicker than thought, and then precipitating the motions of the struggling
Title:  victim, he dashed into the river, down whose stream it glided away, gasping
Title:  audibly for breath with its ebbing life. This deed of apparent cruelty, but
Title:  of real necessity, fell upon the spirits of the travelers like a terrific
Title:  warning of the peril in which they stood, heightened as it was by the calm
Title:  though steady resolution of the actors in the scene. The sisters shuddered
Title:  and clung closer to each other, while Heyward instinctively laid his hand on
Title:  one of the pistols he had just drawn from their holsters, as he placed
Title:  himself between his charge and those dense shadows that seemed to draw an
Title:  impenetrable veil before the bosom of the forest.
Title:  
Title:  The Indians, however, hesitated not a moment, but taking the bridles, they
Title:  led the frightened and reluctant horses into the bed of the river.
Title:  
Title:  At a short distance from the shore they turned, and were soon concealed by
Title:  the projection of the bank, under the brow of which they moved, in a
Title:  direction opposite to the course of the waters. In the meantime, the scout
Title:  drew a canoe of bark from its place of concealment beneath some low bushes,
Title:  whose branches were waving with the eddies of the current, into which he
Title:  silently motioned for the females to enter. They complied without
Title:  hesitation, though many a fearful and anxious glance was thrown behind them,
Title:  toward the thickening gloom, which now lay like a dark barrier along the
Title:  margin of the stream.
Title:  
Title:  So soon as Cora and Alice were seated, the scout, without regarding the
Title:  element, directed Heyward to support one side of the frail vessel, and
Title:  posting himself at the other, they bore it up against the stream, followed
Title:  by the dejected owner of the dead foal. In this manner they proceeded, for
Title:  many rods, in a silence that was only interrupted by the rippling of the
Title:  water, as its eddies played around them, or the low dash made by their own
Title:  cautious footsteps. Heyward yielded the guidance of the canoe implicitly to
Title:  the scout, who approached or receded from the shore, to avoid the fragments
Title:  of rocks, or deeper parts of the river, with a readiness that showed his
Title:  knowledge of the route they held. Occasionally he would stop; and in the
Title:  midst of a breathing stillness, that the dull but increasing roar of the
Title:  waterfall only served to render more impressive, he would listen with
Title:  painful intenseness, to catch any sounds that might arise from the
Title:  slumbering forest. When assured that all was still, and unable to detect,
Title:  even by the aid of his practiced senses, any sign of his approaching foes,
Title:  he would deliberately resume his slow and guarded progress. At length they
Title:  reached a point in the river where the roving eye of Heyward became riveted
Title:  on a cluster of black objects, collected at a spot where the high bank threw
Title:  a deeper shadow than usual on the dark waters. Hesitating to advance, he
Title:  pointed out the place to the attention of his companion.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, returned the composed scout, the Indians have hid the beasts with the
Title:  judgment of natives! Water leaves no trail, and an owl's eyes would be
Title:  blinded by the darkness of such a hole.
Title:  
Title:  The whole party was soon reunited, and another consultation was held between
Title:  the scout and his new comrades, during which, they, whose fates depended on
Title:  the faith and ingenuity of these unknown foresters, had a little leisure to
Title:  observe their situation more minutely.
Title:  
Title:  The river was confined between high and cragged rocks, one of which impended
Title:  above the spot where the canoe rested. As these, again, were surmounted by
Title:  tall trees, which appeared to totter on the brows of the precipice, it gave
Title:  the stream the appearance of running through a deep and narrow dell. All
Title:  beneath the fantastic limbs and ragged tree tops, which were, here and
Title:  there, dimly painted against the starry zenith, lay alike in shadowed
Title:  obscurity. Behind them, the curvature of the banks soon bounded the view by
Title:  the same dark and wooded outline; but in front, and apparently at no great
Title:  distance, the water seemed piled against the heavens, whence it tumbled into
Title:  caverns, out of which issued those sullen sounds that had loaded the evening
Title:  atmosphere. It seemed, in truth, to be a spot devoted to seclusion, and the
Title:  sisters imbibed a soothing impression of security, as they gazed upon its
Title:  romantic though not unappalling beauties. A general movement among their
Title:  conductors, however, soon recalled them from a comtemplation of the wild
Title:  charms that night had assisted to lend the place to a painful sense of their
Title:  real peril.
Title:  
Title:  The horses had been secured to some scattering shrubs that grew in the
Title:  fissures of the rocks, where, standing in the water, they were left to pass
Title:  the night. The scout directed Heyward and his disconsolate fellow travelers
Title:  to seat themselves in the forward end of the canoe, and took possession of
Title:  the other himself, as erect and steady as if he floated in a vessel of much
Title:  firmer materials. The Indians warily retraced their steps toward the place
Title:  they had left, when the scout, placing his pole against a rock, by a
Title:  powerful shove, sent his frail bark directly into the turbulent stream. For
Title:  many minutes the struggle between the light bubble in which they floated and
Title:  the swift current was severe and doubtful. Forbidden to stir even a hand,
Title:  and almost afraid to breath, lest they should expose the frail fabric to the
Title:  fury of the stream, the passengers watched the glancing waters in feverish
Title:  suspense. Twenty times they thought the whirling eddies were sweeping them
Title:  to destruction, when the masterhand of their pilot would bring the bows of
Title:  the canoe to stem the rapid. A long, a vigorous, and, as it appeared to the
Title:  females, a desperate effort, closed the struggle. Just as Alice veiled her
Title:  eyes in horror, under the impression that they were about to be swept within
Title:  the vortex at the foot of the cataract, the canoe floated, stationary, at
Title:  the side of a flat rock, that lay on a level with the water.
Title:  
Title:  Where are we, and what is next to be done! demanded Heyward, perceiving that
Title:  the exertions of the scout had ceased.
Title:  
Title:  You are at the foot of Glenn's, returned the other, speaking aloud, without
Title:  fear of consequences within the roar of the cataract; and the next thing is
Title:  to make a steady landing, lest the canoe upset, and you should go down again
Title:  the hard road we have traveled faster than you came up; 'tis a hard rift to
Title:  stem, when the river is a little swelled; and five is an unnatural number to
Title:  keep dry, in a hurry-skurry, with a little birchen bark and gum. There, go
Title:  you all on the rock, and I will bring up the Mohicans with the venison. A
Title:  man had better sleep without his scalp, than famish in the midst of plenty.
Title:  
Title:  His passengers gladly complied with these directions. As the last foot
Title:  touched the rock, the canoe whirled from its station, when the tall form of
Title:  the scout was seen, for an instant, gliding above the waters, before it
Title:  disappeared in the impenetrable darkness that rested on the bed of the
Title:  river. Left by their guide, the travelers remained a few minutes in helpless
Title:  ignorance, afraid even to move along the broken rocks, lest a false step
Title:  should precipitate them down some one of the many deep and roaring caverns,
Title:  into which the water seemed to tumble, on every side of them. Their
Title:  suspense, however, was soon relieved; for, aided by the skill of the
Title:  natives, the canoe shot back into the eddy, and floated again at the side of
Title:  the low rock, before they thought the scout had even time to rejoin his
Title:  companions.
Title:  
Title:  We are now fortified, garrisoned, and provisioned, cried Heyward cheerfully,
Title:  and may set Montcalm and his allies at defiance. How, now, my vigilant
Title:  sentinel, can see anything of those you call the Iroquois, on the main land!
Title:  
Title:  I call them Iroquois, because to me every native, who speaks a foreign
Title:  tongue, is accounted an enemy, though he may pretend to serve the king! If
Title:  Webb wants faith and honesty in an Indian, let him bring out the tribes of
Title:  the Delawares, and send these greedy and lying Mohawks and Oneidas, with
Title:  their six nations of varlets, where in nature they belong, among the French!
Title:  
Title:  We should then exchange a warlike for a useless friend! I have heard that
Title:  the Delawares have laid aside the hatchet, and are content to be called
Title:  women!
Title:  
Title:  Aye, shame on the Hollanders1 and Iroquois, who circumvented them by their
Title:  deviltries, into such a treaty! But I have known them for twenty years, and
Title:  I call him liar that says cowardly blood runs in the veins of a Delaware.
Title:  You have driven their tribes from the seashore, and would now believe what
Title:  their enemies say, that you may sleep at night upon an easy pillow. No, no;
Title:  to me, every Indian who speaks a foreign tongue is an Iroquois, whether the
Title:  castle2 of his tribe be in Canada, or be in York. Heyward, perceiving that
Title:  the stubborn adherence of the scout to the cause of his friends the
Title:  Delawares, or Mohicans, for they were branches of the same numerous people,
Title:  was likely to prolong a useless discussion, changed the subject.
Title:  
Title:  Treaty or no treaty, I know full well that your two companions are brave and
Title:  cautious warriors! have they heard or seen anything of our enemies!
Title:  
Title:  An Indian is a mortal to be felt afore he is seen, returned the scout,
Title:  ascending the rock, and throwing the deer carelessly down. I trust to other
Title:  signs than such as come in at the eye, when I am outlying on the trail of
Title:  the Mingoes.
Title:  
Title:  Do your ears tell you that they have traced our retreat?
Title:  
Title:  I should be sorry to think they had, though this is a spot that stout
Title:  courage might hold for a smart scrimmage. I will not deny, however, but the
Title:  horses cowered when I passed them, as though they scented the wolves; and a
Title:  wolf is a beast that is apt to hover about an Indian ambushment, craving the
Title:  offals of the deer the savages kill.
Title:  
Title:  You forget the buck at your feet! or, may we not owe their visit to the dead
Title:  colt? Ha! what noise is that?
Title:  
Title:  Poor Miriam! murmured the stranger; thy foal was foreordained to become a
Title:  prey to ravenous beasts! Then, suddenly lifting up his voice, amid the
Title:  eternal din of the waters, he sang aloud:
Title:  
Title:       First born of Egypt, smite did he,
Title:       Of mankind, and of beast also:
Title:       O, Egypt! wonders sent 'midst thee,
Title:       On Pharaoh and his servants too!
Title:  
Title:  The death of the colt sits heavy on the heart of its owner, said the scout;
Title:  but it's a good sign to see a man account upon his dumb friends. He has the
Title:  religion of the matter, in believing what is to happen will happen; and with
Title:  such a consolation, it won't be long afore he submits to the rationality of
Title:  killing a four-footed beast to save the lives of human men. It may be as you
Title:  say, he continued, reverting to the purport of Heyward's last remark; and
Title:  the greater the reason why we should cut our steaks, and let the carcass
Title:  drive down the stream, or we shall have the pack howling along the cliffs,
Title:  begrudging every mouthful we swallow. Besides, though the Delaware tongue is
Title:  the same as a book to the Iroquois, the cunning varlets are quick enough at
Title:  understanding the reason of a wolf's howl.
Title:  
Title:  The scout, while making his remarks, was busied in collecting certain
Title:  necessary implements; as he concluded, he moved silently by the group of
Title:  travelers, accompanied by the Mohicans, who seemed to comprehend his
Title:  intentions with instinctive readiness, when the whole three disappeared in
Title:  succession, seeming to vanish against the dark face of a perpendicular rock
Title:  that rose to the height of a few yards, within as many feet of the water's
Title:  edge.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 New York was originally a colony of the Dutch.
Title:  
Title:  2 The principal villages of the Indians are still called castles by the
Title:  whites of New York. Oneida castle is no more than a scattered hamlet; but
Title:  the name is in general use.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 6
Title:  
Title:       Those strains that once did sweet in Zion glide;
Title:       He wales a portion with judicious care;
Title:       And Let us worship God, he says, with solemn air.
Title:  
Title:                                                                   BURNS
Title:  
Title:  Heyward and his female companions witnessed this mysterious movement with
Title:  secret uneasiness; for, though the conduct of the white man had hitherto
Title:  been above reproach, his rude equipments, blunt address, and strong
Title:  antipathies, together with the character of his silent associates, were all
Title:  causes for exciting distrust in minds that had been so recently alarmed by
Title:  Indian treachery.
Title:  
Title:  The stranger alone disregarded the passing incidents. He seated himself on a
Title:  projection of the rocks, whence he gave no other signs of consciousness than
Title:  by the struggles of his spirit, as manifested in frequent and heavy sighs.
Title:  Smothered voices were next heard, as though men called to each other in the
Title:  bowels of the earth, when a sudden light flashed upon those without, and
Title:  laid bare the much-prized secret of the place.
Title:  
Title:  At the further extremity of a narrow, deep cavern in the rock, whose length
Title:  appeared much extended by the perspective and the nature of the light by
Title:  which it was seen, was seated the scout, holding a blazing knot of pine. The
Title:  strong glare of the fire fell full upon his sturdy, weather-beaten
Title:  countenance and forest attire, lending an air of romantic wildness to the
Title:  aspect of an individual, who, seen by the sober light of day, would have
Title:  exhibited the peculiarities of a man remarkable for the strangeness of his
Title:  dress, the iron-like inflexibility of his frame, and the singular compound
Title:  of quick, vigilant sagacity, and of exquisite simplicity, that by turns
Title:  usurped the possession of his muscular features. At a little distance in
Title:  advance stood Uncas, his whole person thrown powerfully into view. The
Title:  travelers anxiously regarded the upright, flexible figure of the young
Title:  Mohican, graceful and unrestrained in the attitudes and movements of nature.
Title:  Though his person was more than usually screened by a green and fringed
Title:  hunting-shirt, like that of the white man, there was no concealment to his
Title:  dark, glancing, fearless eye, alike terrible and calm; the bold outline of
Title:  his high, haughty features, pure in their native red; or to the dignified
Title:  elevation of his receding forehead, together with all the finest proportions
Title:  of a noble head, bared to the generous scalping tuft. It was the first
Title:  opportunity possessed by Duncan and his companions to view the marked
Title:  lineaments of either of their Indian attendants, and each individual of the
Title:  party felt relieved from a burden of doubt, as the proud and determined,
Title:  though wild expression of the features of the young warrior forced itself on
Title:  their notice. They felt it might be a being partially benighted in the vale
Title:  of ignorance, but it could not be one who would willingly devote his rich
Title:  natural gifts to the purposes of wanton treachery. The ingenuous Alice gazed
Title:  at his free air and proud carriage, as she would have looked upon some
Title:  precious relic of the Grecian chisel, to which life had been imparted by the
Title:  intervention of a miracle; while Heyward, though accustomed to see the
Title:  perfection of form which abounds among the uncorrupted natives, openly
Title:  expressed his admiration at such an unblemished specimen of the noblest
Title:  proportions of man.
Title:  
Title:  I could sleep in peace, whispered Alice, in reply, with such a fearless and
Title:  generous-looking youth for my sentinel. Surely, Duncan, those cruel murders,
Title:  those terrific scenes of torture, of which we read and hear so much, are
Title:  never acted in the presence of such as he!
Title:  
Title:  This certainly is a rare and brilliant instance of those natural qualities
Title:  in which these peculiar people are said to excel, he answered. I agree with
Title:  you, Alice, in thinking that such a front and eye were formed rather to
Title:  intimidate than to deceive; but let us not practice a deception upon
Title:  ourselves, by expecting any other exhibition of what we esteem virtue than
Title:  according to the fashion of the savage. As bright examples of great
Title:  qualities are but too uncommon among Christians, so are they singular and
Title:  solitary with the Indians; though, for the honor of our common nature,
Title:  neither are incapable of producing them. Let us then hope that this Mohican
Title:  may not disappoint our wishes, but prove what his looks assert him to be, a
Title:  brave and constant friend.
Title:  
Title:  Now Major Heyward speaks as Major Heyward should, said Cora; who that looks
Title:  at this creature of nature, remembers the shade of his skin?
Title:  
Title:  A short and apparently an embarrassed silence succeeded this remark, which
Title:  was interrupted by the scout calling to them, aloud, to enter.
Title:  
Title:  This fire begins to show too bright a flame, he continued, as they complied,
Title:  and might light the Mingoes to our undoing. Uncas, drop the blanket, and
Title:  show the knaves its dark side. This is not such a supper as a major of the
Title:  Royal Americans has a right to expect, but I've known stout detachments of
Title:  the corps glad to eat their venison raw, and without a relish, too.1 Here,
Title:  you see, we have plenty of salt, and can make a quick broil. There's fresh
Title:  sassafras boughs for the ladies to sit on, which may not be as proud as
Title:  their my-hog-guinea chairs, but which sends up a sweeter flavor, than the
Title:  skin of any hog can do, be it of Guinea, or be it of any other land. Come,
Title:  friend, don't be mournful for the colt; 'twas an innocent thing, and had not
Title:  seen much hardship. Its death will save the creature many a sore back and
Title:  weary foot!
Title:  
Title:  Uncas did as the other had directed, and when the voice of Hawkeye ceased,
Title:  the roar of the cataract sounded like the rumbling of distant thunder.
Title:  
Title:  Are we quite safe in this cavern? demanded Heyward. Is there no danger of
Title:  surprise? A single armed man, at its entrance, would hold us at his mercy.
Title:  
Title:  A spectral-looking figure stalked from out of the darkness behind the scout,
Title:  and seizing a blazing brand, held it toward the further extremity of their
Title:  place of retreat. Alice uttered a faint shriek, and even Cora rose to her
Title:  feet, as this appalling object moved into the light; but a single word from
Title:  Heyward calmed them, with the assurance it was only their attendant,
Title:  Chingachgook, who, lifting another blanket, discovered that the cavern had
Title:  two outlets. Then, holding the brand, he crossed a deep, narrow chasm in the
Title:  rocks which ran at right angles with the passage they were in, but which,
Title:  unlike that, was open to the heavens, and entered another cave, answering to
Title:  the description of the first, in every essential particular.
Title:  
Title:  Such old foxes as Chingachgook and myself are not often caught in a barrow
Title:  with one hole, said Hawkeye, laughing; you can easily see the cunning of the
Title:  place - the rock is black limestone, which everybody knows is soft; it makes
Title:  no uncomfortable pillow, where brush and pine wood is scarce; well, the fall
Title:  was once a few yards below us, and I dare to say was, in its time, as
Title:  regular and as handsome a sheet of water as any along the Hudson. But old
Title:  age is a great injury to good looks, as these sweet young ladies have yet to
Title:  l'arn! The place is sadly changed! These rocks are full of cracks, and in
Title:  some places they are softer than at othersome, and the water has worked out
Title:  deep hollows for itself, until it has fallen back, ay, some hundred feet,
Title:  breaking here and wearing there, until the falls have neither shape nor
Title:  consistency.
Title:  
Title:  In what part of them are we? asked Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Why, we are nigh the spot that Providence first placed them at, but where,
Title:  it seems, they were too rebellious to stay. The rock proved softer on each
Title:  side of us, and so they left the center of the river bare and dry, first
Title:  working out these two little holes for us to hide in.
Title:  
Title:  We are then on an island!
Title:  
Title:  Ay! there are the falls on two sides of us, and the river above and below.
Title:  If you had daylight, it would be worth the trouble to step up on the height
Title:  of this rock, and look at the perversity of the water. It falls by no rule
Title:  at all; sometimes it leaps, sometimes it tumbles; there it skips; here it
Title:  shoots; in one place 'tis white as snow, and in another 'tis green as grass;
Title:  hereabouts, it pitches into deep hollows, that rumble and crush the 'arth;
Title:  and thereaways, it ripples and sings like a brook, fashioning whirlpools and
Title:  gullies in the old stone, as if 'twas no harder than trodden clay. The whole
Title:  design of the river seems disconcerted. First it runs smoothly, as if
Title:  meaning to go down the descent as things were ordered; then it angles about
Title:  and faces the shores; nor are there places wanting where it looks backward,
Title:  as if unwilling to leave the wilderness, to mingle with the salt. Ay, lady,
Title:  the fine cobweb-looking cloth you wear at your throat is coarse, and like a
Title:  fishnet, to little spots I can show you, where the river fabricates all
Title:  sorts of images, as if having broke loose from order, it would try its hand
Title:  at everything. And yet what does it amount to! After the water has been
Title:  suffered so to have its will, for a time, like a headstrong man, it is
Title:  gathered together by the hand that made it, and a few rods below you may see
Title:  it all, flowing on steadily toward the sea, as was foreordained from the
Title:  first foundation of the 'arth!
Title:  
Title:  While his auditors received a cheering assurance of the security of their
Title:  place of concealment from this untutored description of Glenn's,2 they were
Title:  much inclined to judge differently from Hawkeye, of its wild beauties. But
Title:  they were not in a situation to suffer their thoughts to dwell on the charms
Title:  of natural objects; and, as the scout had not found it necessary to cease
Title:  his culinary labors while he spoke, unless to point out, with a broken fork,
Title:  the direction of some particularly obnoxious point in the rebellious stream,
Title:  they now suffered their attention to be drawn to the necessary though more
Title:  vulgar consideration of their supper.
Title:  
Title:  The repast, which was greatly aided by the addition of a few delicacies that
Title:  Heyward had the precaution to bring with him when they left their horses,
Title:  was exceedingly refreshing to the weary party. Uncas acted as attendant to
Title:  the females, performing all the little offices within his power, with a
Title:  mixture of dignity and anxious grace, that served to amuse Heyward, who well
Title:  knew that it was an utter innovation on the Indian customs, which forbid
Title:  their warriors to descend to any menial employment, especially in favor of
Title:  their women. As the rights of hospitality were, however, considered sacred
Title:  among them, this little departure from the dignity of manhood excited no
Title:  audible comment. Had there been one there sufficiently disengaged to become
Title:  a close observer, he might have fancied that the services of the young chief
Title:  were not entirely impartial. That while he tendered to Alice the gourd of
Title:  sweet water, and the venison in a trencher, neatly carved from the knot of
Title:  the pepperidge, with sufficient courtesy, in performing the same offices to
Title:  her sister, his dark eye lingered on her rich, speaking countenance. Once or
Title:  twice he was compelled to speak, to command her attention of those he
Title:  served. In such cases he made use of English, broken and imperfect, but
Title:  sufficiently intelligible, and which he rendered so mild and musical, by his
Title:  deep, guttural voice, that it never failed to cause both ladies to look up
Title:  in admiration and astonishment. In the course of these civilities, a few
Title:  sentences were exchanged, that served to establish the appearance of an
Title:  amicable intercourse between the parties.
Title:  
Title:  In the meanwhile, the gravity of Chingcachgook remained immovable. He had
Title:  seated himself more within the circle of light, where the frequent, uneasy
Title:  glances of his guests were better enabled to separate the natural expression
Title:  of his face from the artificial terrors of the war paint. They found a
Title:  strong resemblance between father and son, with the difference that might be
Title:  expected from age and hardships. The fierceness of his countenance now
Title:  seemed to slumber, and in its place was to be seen the quiet, vacant
Title:  composure which distinguishes an Indian warrior, when his faculties are not
Title:  required for any of the greater purposes of his existence. It was, however,
Title:  easy to be seen, by the occasional gleams that shot across his swarthy
Title:  visage, that it was only necessary to arouse his passions, in order to give
Title:  full effect to the terrific device which he had adopted to intimidate his
Title:  enemies. On the other hand, the quick, roving eye of the scout seldom
Title:  rested. He ate and drank with an appetite that no sense of danger could
Title:  disturb, but his vigilance seemed never to desert him. Twenty times the
Title:  gourd or the venison was suspended before his lips, while his head was
Title:  turned aside, as though he listened to some distant and distrusted sounds -
Title:  a movement that never failed to recall his guests from regarding the
Title:  novelties of their situation, to a recollection of the alarming reasons that
Title:  had driven them to seek it. As these frequent pauses were never followed by
Title:  any remark, the momentary uneasiness they created quickly passed away, and
Title:  for a time was forgotten.
Title:  
Title:  Come, friend, said Hawkeye, drawing out a keg from beneath a cover of
Title:  leaves, toward the close of the repast, and addressing the stranger who sat
Title:  at his elbow, doing great justice to his culinary skill, try a little
Title:  spruce; 'twill wash away all thoughts of the colt, and quicken the life in
Title:  your bosom. I drink to our better friendship, hoping that a little
Title:  horse-flesh may leave no heart-burnings atween us. How do you name yourself?
Title:  
Title:  Gamut - David Gamut, returned the singing master, preparing to wash down his
Title:  sorrows in a powerful draught of the woodsman's high-flavored and well-laced
Title:  compound.
Title:  
Title:  A very good name, and, I dare say, handed down from honest forefathers. I'm
Title:  an admirator of names, though the Christian fashions fall far below savage
Title:  customs in this particular. The biggest coward I ever knew as called Lyon;
Title:  and his wife, Patience, would scold you out of hearing in less time than a
Title:  hunted deer would run a rod. With an Indian 'tis a matter of conscience;
Title:  what he calls himself, he generally is - not that Chingachgook, which
Title:  signifies Big Sarpent, is really a snake, big or little; but that he
Title:  understands the windings and turnings of human natur, and is silent, and
Title:  strikes his enemies when they least expect him. What may be your calling?
Title:  
Title:  I am an unworthy instructor in the art of psalmody.
Title:  
Title:  Anan!
Title:  
Title:  I teach singing to the youths of the Connecticut levy.
Title:  
Title:  You might be better employed. The young hounds go laughing and singing too
Title:  much already through the woods, when they ought not to breathe louder than a
Title:  fox in his cover. Can you use the smoothbore, or handle the rifle?
Title:  
Title:  Praised be God, I have never had occasion to meddle with murderous
Title:  implements!
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps you understand the compass, and lay down the watercourses and
Title:  mountains of the wilderness on paper, in order that they who follow may find
Title:  places by their given names?
Title:  
Title:  I practice no such employment.
Title:  
Title:  You have a pair of legs that might make a long path seem short! you journey
Title:  sometimes, I fancy, with tidings for the general.
Title:  
Title:  Never; I follow no other than my own high vocation, which is instruction in
Title:  sacred music!
Title:  
Title:  'Tis a strange calling! muttered Hawkeye, with an inward laugh, to go
Title:  through life, like a catbird, mocking all the ups and downs that may happen
Title:  to come out of other men's throats. Well, friend, I suppose it is your gift,
Title:  and mustn't be denied any more than if 'twas shooting, or some other better
Title:  inclination. Let us hear what you can do in that way; 'twill be a friendly
Title:  manner of saying good-night, for 'tis time that these ladies should be
Title:  getting strength for a hard and a long push, in the pride of the morning,
Title:  afore the Maquas are stirring.
Title:  
Title:  With joyful pleasure do I consent, said David, adjusting his iron-rimmed
Title:  spectacles, and producing his beloved little volume, which he immediately
Title:  tendered to Alice. What can be more fitting and consolatory, than to offer
Title:  up evening praise, after a day of such exceeding jeopardy!
Title:  
Title:  Alice smiled; but, regarding Heyward, she blushed and hesitated.
Title:  
Title:  Indulge yourself, he whispered; ought not the suggestion of the worthy
Title:  namesake of the Psalmist to have its weight at such a moment?
Title:  
Title:  Encouraged by his opinion, Alice did what her pious inclinations, and her
Title:  keen relish for gentle sounds, had before so strongly urged. The book was
Title:  open at a hymn not ill adapted to their situation, and in which the poet, no
Title:  longer goaded by his desire to excel the inspired King of Israel, had
Title:  discovered some chastened and respectable powers. Cora betrayed a
Title:  disposition to support her sister, and the sacred song proceeded, after the
Title:  indispensable preliminaries of the pitchpipe, and the tune had been duly
Title:  attended to by the methodical David.
Title:  
Title:  The air was solemn and slow. At times it rose to the fullest compass of the
Title:  rich voices of the females, who hung over their little book in holy
Title:  excitement, and again it sank so low, that the rushing of the waters ran
Title:  through their melody, like a hollow accompaniment. The natural taste and
Title:  true ear of David governed and modified the sounds to suit the confined
Title:  cavern, every crevice and cranny of which was filled with the thrilling
Title:  notes of their flexible voices. The Indians riveted their eyes on the rocks,
Title:  and listened with an attention that seemed to turn them into stone. But the
Title:  scout, who had placed his chin in his hand, with an expression of cold
Title:  indifference, gradually suffered his rigid features to relax, until, as
Title:  verse succeeded verse, he felt his iron nature subdued, while his
Title:  recollection was carried back to boyhood, when his ears had been accustomed
Title:  to listen to similar sounds of praise, in the settlements of the colony. His
Title:  roving eyes began to moisten, and before the hymn was ended scalding tears
Title:  rolled out of fountains that had long seemed dry, and followed each other
Title:  down those cheeks, that had oftener felt the storms of heaven than any
Title:  testimonials of weakness. The singers were dwelling on one of those low,
Title:  dying chords, which the ear devours with such greedy rapture, as if
Title:  conscious that it is about to lose them, when a cry, that seemed neither
Title:  human nor earthly, rose in the outward air, penetrating not only the
Title:  recesses of the cavern, but to the inmost hearts of all who heard it. It was
Title:  followed by a stillness apparently as deep as if the waters had been checked
Title:  in their furious progress, at such a horrid and unusual interruption.
Title:  
Title:  What is it? murmured Alice, after a few moments of terrible suspense.
Title:  
Title:  What is it? repeated Hewyard aloud.
Title:  
Title:  Neither Hawkeye nor the Indians made any reply. They listened, as if
Title:  expecting the sound would be repeated, with a manner that expressed their
Title:  own astonishment. At length they spoke together, earnestly, in the Delaware
Title:  language, when Uncas, passing by the inner and most concealed aperture,
Title:  cautiously left the cavern. When he had gone, the scout first spoke in
Title:  English.
Title:  
Title:  What it is, or what it is not, none here can tell, though two of us have
Title:  ranged the woods for more than thirty years. I did believe there was no cry
Title:  that Indian or beast could make, that my ears had not heard; but this has
Title:  proved that I was only a vain and conceited mortal.
Title:  
Title:  Was it not, then, the shout the warriors make when they wish to intimidate
Title:  their enemies? asked Cora who stood drawing her veil about her person, with
Title:  a calmness to which her agitated sister was a stranger.
Title:  
Title:  No, no; this was bad, and shocking, and had a sort of unhuman sound; but
Title:  when you once hear the war-whoop, you will never mistake it for anything
Title:  else. Well, Uncas! speaking in Delaware to the young chief as he re-entered,
Title:  what see you? do our lights shine through the blankets?
Title:  
Title:  The answer was short, and apparently decided, being given in the same
Title:  tongue.
Title:  
Title:  There is nothing to be seen without, continued Hawkeye, shaking his head in
Title:  discontent; and our hiding-place is still in darkness. Pass into the other
Title:  cave, you that need it, and seek for sleep; we must be afoot long before the
Title:  sun, and make the most of our time to get to Edward, while the Mingoes are
Title:  taking their morning nap.
Title:  
Title:  Cora set the example of compliance, with a steadiness that taught the more
Title:  timid Alice the necessity of obedience. Before leaving the place, however,
Title:  she whispered a request to Duncan, that he would follow. Uncas raised the
Title:  blanket for their passage, and as the sisters turned to thank him for this
Title:  act of attention, they saw the scout seated again before the dying embers,
Title:  with his face resting on his hands, in a manner which showed how deeply he
Title:  brooded on the unaccountable interruption which had broken up their evening
Title:  devotions.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward took with him a blazing knot, which threw a dim light through the
Title:  narrow vista of their new apartment. Placing it in a favorable position, he
Title:  joined the females, who now found themselves alone with him for the first
Title:  time since they had left the friendly ramparts of Fort Edward.
Title:  
Title:  Leave us not, Duncan, said Alice: we cannot sleep in such a place as this,
Title:  with that horrid cry still ringing in our ears.
Title:  
Title:  First let us examine into the security of your fortress, he answered, and
Title:  then we will speak of rest.
Title:  
Title:  He approached the further end of the cavern, to an outlet, which, like the
Title:  others, was concealed by blankets; and removing the thick screen, breathed
Title:  the fresh and reviving air from the cataract. One arm of the river flowed
Title:  through a deep, narrow ravine, which its current had worn in the soft rock,
Title:  directly beneath his feet, forming an effectual defense, as he believed,
Title:  against any danger from that quarter; the water, a few rods above them,
Title:  plunging, glancing, and sweeping along in its most violent and broken
Title:  manner.
Title:  
Title:  Nature has made an impenetrable barrier on this side, he continued, pointing
Title:  down the perpendicular declivity into the dark current before he dropped the
Title:  blanket; and as you know that good men and true are on guard in front I see
Title:  no reason why the advice of our honest host should be disregarded. I am
Title:  certain Cora will join me in saying that sleep is necessary to you both.
Title:  
Title:  Cora may submit to the justice of your opinion though she cannot put it in
Title:  practice, returned the elder sister, who had placed herself by the side of
Title:  Alice, on a couch of sassafras; there would be other causes to chase away
Title:  sleep, though we had been spared the shock of this mysterious noise. Ask
Title:  yourself, Heyward, can daughters forget the anxiety a father must endure,
Title:  whose children lodge he knows not where or how, in such a wilderness, and in
Title:  the midst of so many perils?
Title:  
Title:  He is a soldier, and knows how to estimate the chances of the woods.
Title:  
Title:  He is a father, and cannot deny his nature.
Title:  
Title:  How kind has he ever been to all my follies, how tender and indulgent to all
Title:  my wishes! sobbed Alice. We have been selfish, sister, in urging our visit
Title:  at such hazard.
Title:  
Title:  I may have been rash in pressing his consent in a moment of much
Title:  embarrassment, but I would have proved to him, that however others might
Title:  neglect him in his strait his children at least were faithful.
Title:  
Title:  When he heard of your arrival at Edward, said Heyward, kindly, there was a
Title:  powerful struggle in his bosom between fear and love; though the latter,
Title:  heightened, if possible, by so long a separation, quickly prevailed. It is
Title:  the spirit of my noble- minded Cora that leads them, Duncan, he said, and I
Title:  will not balk it. Would to God, that he who holds the honor of our royal
Title:  master in his guardianship, would show but half her firmness!
Title:  
Title:  And did he not speak of me, Heyward? demanded Alice, with jealous affection;
Title:  surely, he forgot not altogether his little Elsie?
Title:  
Title:  That were impossible, returned the young man; he called you by a thousand
Title:  endearing epithets, that I may not presume to use, but to the justice of
Title:  which, I can warmly testify. Once, indeed, he said - -
Title:  
Title:  Duncan ceased speaking; for while his eyes were riveted on those of Alice,
Title:  who had turned toward him with the eagerness of filial affection, to catch
Title:  his words, the same strong, horrid cry, as before, filled the air, and
Title:  rendered him mute. A long, breathless silence succeeded, during which each
Title:  looked at the others in fearful expectation of hearing the sound repeated.
Title:  At length, the blanket was slowly raised, and the scout stood in the
Title:  aperture with a countenance whose firmness evidently began to give way
Title:  before a mystery that seemed to threaten some danger, against which all his
Title:  cunning and experience might prove of no avail.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 In vulgar parlance the condiments of a repast are called by the American a
Title:  relish, substituting the thing for its effect. These provincial terms are
Title:  frequently put in the mouths of the speakers, according to their several
Title:  conditions in life. Most of them are of local use, and others quite peculiar
Title:  to the particular class of men to which the character belongs. In the
Title:  present instance, the scout uses the word with immediate reference to the
Title:  salt, with which his own party was so fortunate as to be provided. 2 Glenn's
Title:  Falls are on the Hudson, some forty or fifty miles above the head of tide,
Title:  or that place where the river becomes navigable for sloops. The description
Title:  of this picturesque and remakable little cataract, as given by the scout, is
Title:  sufficiently correct, though the application of the water to uses of
Title:  civilized life has materially injured its beauties. The rocky island and the
Title:  two caverns are known to every traveler, since the former sustains the pier
Title:  of a bridge, which is now thrown across the river, immediately above the
Title:  fall. In explanation of the taste of Hawkeye, it should be remembered that
Title:  men always prize that most which is least enjoyed. Thus, in a new country,
Title:  the woods and other objects, which in an old country would be maintained at
Title:  great cost, are got rid of, simply with a view of improving as it is called.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 7
Title:  
Title:       They do not sleep,
Title:       On yonder cliffs, a grizzly band,
Title:       I see them sit.
Title:  
Title:                                                                    GRAY
Title:  
Title:  'Twould be neglecting a warning that is given for our good to lie hid any
Title:  longer, said Hawkeye when such sounds are raised in the forest. These gentle
Title:  ones may keep close, but the Mohicans and I will watch upon the rock, where
Title:  I suppose a major of the Sixtieth would wish to keep us company.
Title:  
Title:  Is, then, our danger so pressing? asked Cora.
Title:  
Title:  He who makes strange sounds, and gives them out for man's information, alone
Title:  knows our danger. I should think myself wicked, unto rebellion against His
Title:  will, was I to burrow with such warnings in the air! Even the weak soul who
Title:  passes his days in singing is stirred by the cry, and, as he says, is ready
Title:  to go forth to the battle. If 'twere only a battle, it would be a thing
Title:  understood by us all, and easily managed; but I have heard that when such
Title:  shrieks are atween heaven and 'arth, it betokens another sort of warfare!
Title:  
Title:  If all our reasons for fear, my friend, are confined to such as proceed from
Title:  supernatural causes, we have but little occasion to be alarmed, continued
Title:  the undisturbed Cora, are you certain that our enemies have not invented
Title:  some new and ingenious method to strike us with terror, that their conquest
Title:  may become more easy?
Title:  
Title:  Lady, returned the scout, solemnly, I have listened to all the sounds of the
Title:  woods for thirty years, as a man will listen whose life and death depend on
Title:  the quickness of his ears. There is no whine of the panther, no whistle of
Title:  the catbird, nor any invention of the devilish Mingoes, that can cheat me! I
Title:  have heard the forest moan like mortal men in their affliction; often, and
Title:  again, have I listened to the wind playing its music in the branches of the
Title:  girdled trees; and I have heard the lightning cracking in the air like the
Title:  snapping of blazing brush as it spitted forth sparks and forked flames; but
Title:  never have I thought that I heard more than the pleasure of him who sported
Title:  with the things of his hand. But neither the Mohicans, nor I, who am a white
Title:  man without a cross, can explain the cry just heard. We, therefore, believe
Title:  it a sign given for our good.
Title:  
Title:  It is extraordinary! said Heyward, taking his pistols from the place where
Title:  he had laid them on entering; be it a sign of peach or a signal of war, it
Title:  must be looked to. Lead the way, my friend; I follow.
Title:  
Title:  On issuing from their place of confinement, the whole party instantly
Title:  experienced a grateful renovation of spirits, by exchanging the pent air of
Title:  the hiding-place for the cool and invigorating atmosphere which played
Title:  around the whirlpools and pitches of the cataract. A heavy evening breeze
Title:  swept along the surface of the river, and seemed to drive the roar of the
Title:  falls into the recesses of their own cavern, whence it issued heavily and
Title:  constant, like thunder rumbling beyond the distant hills. The moon had
Title:  risen, and its light was already glancing here and there on the waters above
Title:  them; but the extremity of the rock where they stood still lay in shadow.
Title:  With the exception of the sounds produced by the rushing waters, and an
Title:  occasional breathing of the air, as it murmured past them in fitful
Title:  currents, the scene was as still as night and solitude could make it. In
Title:  vain were the eyes of each individual bent along the opposite shores, in
Title:  quest of some signs of life, that might explain the nature of the
Title:  interruption they had heard. Their anxious and eager looks were baffled by
Title:  the deceptive light, or rested only on naked rocks, and straight and
Title:  immovable trees.
Title:  
Title:  Here is nothing to be seen but the gloom and quiet of a lovely evening,
Title:  whispered Duncan; how much should we prize such a scene, and all this
Title:  breathing solitude, at any other moment, Cora! Fancy yourselves in security,
Title:  and what now, perhaps, increases your terror, may be made conducive to
Title:  enjoyment - -
Title:  
Title:  Listen! interrupted Alice.
Title:  
Title:  The caution was unnecessary. One more the same sound arose, as if from the
Title:  bed of the river, and having broken out of the narrow bounds of the cliffs,
Title:  was heard undulating through the forest, in distant and dying cadences.
Title:  
Title:  Can any here give a name to such a cry? demanded Hawkeye, when the last echo
Title:  was lost in the woods; if so, let him speak; for myself, I judge it not to
Title:  belong to 'arth!
Title:  
Title:  Here, then, is one who can undeceive you, said Duncan; I know the sound full
Title:  well, for often have I heard it on the field of battle, and in situations
Title:  which are frequent in a soldier's life. 'Tis the horrid shriek that a horse
Title:  will give in his agony; oftener drawn from him in pain, though sometimes in
Title:  terror. My charger is either a prey to the beasts of the forest, or he sees
Title:  his danger, without the power to avoid it. The sound might deceive me in the
Title:  cavern, but in the open air I know it too well to be wrong.
Title:  
Title:  The scout and his companions listened to this simple explanation with the
Title:  interest of men who imbibe new ideas, at the same time that they get rid of
Title:  old ones, which had proved disagreeable inmates. The two latter uttered
Title:  their usual expressive exclamation, hugh! as the truth first glanced upon
Title:  their minds, while the former, after a short, musing pause, took upon
Title:  himself to reply.
Title:  
Title:  I cannot deny your words, he said, for I am little skilled in horses, though
Title:  born where they abound. The wolves must be hovering above their heads on the
Title:  bank, and the timorsome creatures are calling on man for help, in the best
Title:  manner they are able. Uncas - he spoke in Delaware - Uncas, drop down in the
Title:  canoe, and whirl a brand among the pack; or fear may do what the wolves
Title:  can't get at to perform, and leave us without horses in the morning, when we
Title:  shall have so much need to journey swiftly!
Title:  
Title:  The young native had already descended to the water to comply, when a long
Title:  howl was raised on the edge of the river, and was borne swiftly off into the
Title:  depths of the forest, as though the beasts, of their own accord, were
Title:  abandoning their prey in sudden terror. Uncas, with instinctive quickness,
Title:  receded, and the three foresters held another of their low, earnest
Title:  conferences.
Title:  
Title:  We have been like hunters who have lost the points of the heavens, and from
Title:  whom the sun has been hid for days, said Hawkeye, turning away from his
Title:  companions; now we begin again to know the signs of our course, and the
Title:  paths are cleared from briers! Seat yourselves in the shade which the moon
Title:  throws from yonder beech - 'tis thicker than that of the pines - and let us
Title:  wait for that which the Lord may choose to send next. Let all your
Title:  conversation be in whispers; though it would be better, and, perhaps, in the
Title:  end, wiser, if each one held discourse with his own thoughts, for a time.
Title:  
Title:  The manner of the scout was seriously impressive, though no longer
Title:  distinguished by any signs of unmanly apprehension. It was evident that his
Title:  momentary weakness had vanished with the explanation of a mystery which his
Title:  own experience had not served to fathom; and though he now felt all the
Title:  realities of their actual condition, that he was prepared to meet them with
Title:  the energy of his hardy nature. This feeling seemed also common to the
Title:  natives, who placed themselves in positions which commanded a full view of
Title:  both shores, while their own persons were effectually concealed from
Title:  observation. In such circumstances, common prudence dictated that Heyward
Title:  and his companions should imitate a caution that proceeded from so
Title:  intelligent a source. The young man drew a pile of the sassafras from the
Title:  cave, and placing it in the chasm which separated the two caverns, it was
Title:  occupied by the sisters, who were thus protected by the rocks from any
Title:  missiles, while their anxiety was relieved by the assurance that no danger
Title:  could approach without a warning. Heyward himself was posted at hand, so
Title:  near that he might communicate with his companions without raising his voice
Title:  to a dangerous elevation; while David, in imitation of the woodsmen,
Title:  bestowed his person in such a manner among the fissures of the rocks, that
Title:  his ungainly limbs were no longer offensive to the eye.
Title:  
Title:  In this manner hours passed without further interruption. The moon reached
Title:  the zenith, and shed its mild light perpendicularly on the lovely sight of
Title:  the sisters slumbering peacefully in each other's arms. Duncan cast the wide
Title:  shawl of Cora before a spectacle he so much loved to contemplate, and then
Title:  suffered his own head to seek a pillow on the rock. David began to utter
Title:  sounds that would have shocked his delicate organs in more wakeful moments;
Title:  in short, all but Hawkeye and the Mohicans lost every idea of consciousness,
Title:  in uncontrollable drowsiness. But the watchfulness of these vigilant
Title:  protectors neither tired nor slumbered. Immovable as that rock, of which
Title:  each appeared to form a part, they lay, with their eyes roving, without
Title:  intermission, along the dark margin of trees, that bounded the adjacent
Title:  shores of the narrow stream. Not a sound escaped them; the most subtle
Title:  examination could not have told they breathed. It was evident that this
Title:  excess of caution proceeded from an experience that no subtlety on the part
Title:  of their enemies could deceive. It was, however, continued without any
Title:  apparent consequences, until the moon had set, and a pale streak above the
Title:  treetops, at the bend of the river a little below, announced the approach of
Title:  day.
Title:  
Title:  Then, for the first time, Hawkeye was seen to stir. He crawled along the
Title:  rock and shook Duncan from his heavy slumbers.
Title:  
Title:  Now is the time to journey, he whispered; awake the gentle ones, and be
Title:  ready to get into the canoe when I bring it to the landing-place.
Title:  
Title:  Have you had a quiet night? said Heyward; for myself, I believe sleep has
Title:  got the better of my vigilance.
Title:  
Title:  All is yet still as midnight. Be silent, but be quick.
Title:  
Title:  By this time Duncan was thoroughly awake, and he immediately lifted the
Title:  shawl from the sleeping females. The motion caused Cora to raise her hand as
Title:  if to repulse him, while Alice murmured, in her soft, gentle voice, No, no,
Title:  dear father, we were not deserted; Duncan was with us!
Title:  
Title:  Yes, sweet innocence, whispered the youth; Duncan is here, and while life
Title:  continues or danger remains, he will never quit thee. Cora! Alice! awake!
Title:  The hour has come to move!
Title:  
Title:  A loud shriek from the younger of the sisters, and the form of the other
Title:  standing upright before him, in bewildered horror, was the unexpected answer
Title:  he received.
Title:  
Title:  While the words were still on the lips of Heyward, there had arisen such a
Title:  tumult of yells and cries as served to drive the swift currents of his own
Title:  blood back from its bounding course into the fountains of his heart. It
Title:  seemed, for near a minute, as if the demons of hell had possessed themselves
Title:  of the air about them, and were venting their savage humors in barbarous
Title:  sounds. The cries came from no particular direction, though it was evident
Title:  they filled the woods, and, as the appalled listeners easily imagined, the
Title:  caverns of the falls, the rocks, the bed of the river, and the upper air.
Title:  David raised his tall person in the midst of the infernal din, with a hand
Title:  on either ear, exclaiming:
Title:  
Title:  Whence comes this discord! Has hell broke loose, that man should utter
Title:  sounds like these!
Title:  
Title:  The bright flashes and the quick reports of a dozen rifles, from the
Title:  opposite banks of the stream, followed this incautious exposure of his
Title:  person, and left the unfortunate singing master senseless on that rock where
Title:  he had been so long slumbering. The Mohicans boldly sent back the
Title:  intimidating yell of their enemies, who raised a shout of savage triumph at
Title:  the fall of Gamut. The flash of rifles was then quick and close between
Title:  them, but either party was too well skilled to leave even a limb exposed to
Title:  the hostile aim. Duncan listened with intense anxiety for the strokes of the
Title:  paddle, believing that flight was now their only refuge. The river glanced
Title:  by with its ordinary velocity, but the canoe was nowhere to be seen on its
Title:  dark waters. He had just fancied they were cruelly deserted by their scout,
Title:  as a stream of flame issued from the rock beneath them, and a fierce yell,
Title:  blended with a shriek of agony, announced that the messenger of death sent
Title:  from the fatal weapon of Hawkeye, had found a victim. At this slight repulse
Title:  the assailants instantly withdrew, and gradually the place became as still
Title:  as before the sudden tumult.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan seized the favorable moment to spring to the body of Gamut, which he
Title:  bore within the shelter of the narrow chasm that protected the sisters. In
Title:  another minute the whole party ws collected in this spot of comparative
Title:  safety.
Title:  
Title:  The poor fellow has saved his scalp, said Hawkeye, coolly passing his hand
Title:  over the head of David; but he is a proof that a man may be born with too
Title:  long a tongue! 'Twas downright madness to show six feet of flesh and blood,
Title:  on a naked rock, to the raging savages. I only wonder he has escaped with
Title:  life.
Title:  
Title:  Is he not dead? demanded Cora, in a voice whose husky tones showed how
Title:  powerfully natural horror struggled with her assumed firmness. Can we do
Title:  aught to assist the wretched man?
Title:  
Title:  No, no! the life is in his heart yet, and after he has slept awhile he will
Title:  come to himself, and be a wiser man for it, till the hour of his real time
Title:  shall come, returned Hawkeye, casting another oblique glance at the
Title:  insensible body, while he filled his charger with admirable nicety. Carry
Title:  him in, Uncas, and lay him on the sassafras. The longer his nap lasts the
Title:  better it will be for him, as I doubt whether he can find a proper cover for
Title:  such a shape on these rocks; and singing won't do any good with the
Title:  Iroquois.
Title:  
Title:  You believe, then, the attack will be renewed? asked Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Do I expect a hungry wolf will satisfy his craving with a mouthful! They
Title:  have lost a man, and 'tis their fashion, when they meet a loss, and fail in
Title:  the surprise, to fall back; but we shall have them on again, with new
Title:  expedients to circumvent us, and master our scalps. Our main hope, he
Title:  continued, raising his rugged countenance, across which a shade of anxiety
Title:  just then passed like a darkening cloud, will be to keep the rock until
Title:  Munro can send a party to our help! God send it may be soon and under a
Title:  leader that knows the Indian customs!
Title:  
Title:  You hear our probable fortunes, Cora, said Duncan, and you know we have
Title:  everything to hope from the anxiety and experience of your father. Come,
Title:  then, with Alice, into this cavern, where you, at least, will be safe from
Title:  the murderous rifles of our enemies, and where you may bestow a care suited
Title:  to your gentle natures on our unfortunate comrade.
Title:  
Title:  The sisters followed him into the outer cave, where David was beginning, by
Title:  his sighs, to give symptoms of returning consciousness, and then commending
Title:  the wounded man to their attention, he immediately prepared to leave them.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan! said the tremulous voice of Cora, when he had reached the mouth of
Title:  the cavern. He turned and beheld the speaker, whose color had changed to a
Title:  deadly paleness, and whose lips quivered, gazing after him, with an
Title:  expression of interest which immediately recalled him to her side. Remember,
Title:  Duncan, how necessary your safety is to our own - how you bear a father's
Title:  sacred trust - how much depends on your discretion and care - in short, she
Title:  added, while the telltale blood stole over her features, crimsoning her very
Title:  temples, how very deservedly dear you are to all of the name of Munro.
Title:  
Title:  If anything could add to my own base love of life, said Heyward, suffering
Title:  his unconscious eyes to wander to the youthful form of the silent Alice, it
Title:  would be so kind an assurance. As major of the Sixtieth, our honest host
Title:  will tell you I must take my share of the fray; but our task will be easy;
Title:  it is merely to keep these blood-hounds at bay for a few hours.
Title:  
Title:  Without waiting for a reply, he tore himself from the presence of the
Title:  sisters, and joined the scout and his companions, who stil lay within the
Title:  protection of the little chasm between the two caves.
Title:  
Title:  I tell you, Uncas, said the former, as Heyward joined them, you are wasteful
Title:  of your powder, and the kick of the rifle disconcerts your aim! Little
Title:  powder, light lead, and a long arm, seldom fail of bringing the death
Title:  screech from a Mingo! At least, such has been my experience with the
Title:  creatur's. Come, friends: let us to our covers, for no man can tell when or
Title:  where a Maqua1 will strike his blow.
Title:  
Title:  The Indians silently repaired to their appointed stations, which were
Title:  fissures in the rocks, whence they could command the approaches to the foot
Title:  of the falls. In the center of the little island, a few short and stunted
Title:  pines had found root, forming a thicket, into which Hawkeye darted with the
Title:  swiftness of a deer, followed by the active Duncan. Here they secured
Title:  themselves, as well as circumstances would permit, among the shrubs and
Title:  fragments of stone that were scattered about the place. Above them was a
Title:  bare, rounded rock, on each side of which the water played its gambols, and
Title:  plunged into the abysses beneath, in the manner already described. As the
Title:  day had now dawned, the opposite shores no longer presented a confused
Title:  outline, but they were able to look into the woods, and distinguish objects
Title:  beneath a canopy of gloomy pines.
Title:  
Title:  A long and anxious watch succeeded, but without any further evidences of a
Title:  renewed attack; and Duncan began to hope that their fire had proved more
Title:  fatal than was supposed, and that their enemies had been effectually
Title:  repulsed. When he ventured to utter this impression to his companions, it
Title:  was met by Hawkeye with an incredulous shake of the head.
Title:  
Title:  You know not the nature of a Maqua, if you think he is so easily beaten back
Title:  without a scalp! he answered. If there was one of the imps yelling this
Title:  morning, there were forty! and they know our number and quality too well to
Title:  give up the chase so soon. Hist! look into the water above, just where it
Title:  breaks over the rocks. I am no mortal, if the risky devils haven't swam down
Title:  upon the very pitch, and, as bad luck would have it, they have hit the head
Title:  of the island. Hist! man, keep close! or the hair will be off your crown in
Title:  the turning of a knife!
Title:  
Title:  Heyward lifted his head from the cover, and beheld what he justly considered
Title:  a prodigy of rashness and skill. The river had worn away the edge of the
Title:  soft rock in such a manner as to render its first pitch less abrupt and
Title:  perpendicular than is usual at waterfalls. With no other guide than the
Title:  ripple of the stream where it met the head of the island, a party of their
Title:  insatiable foes had ventured into the current, and swam down upon this
Title:  point, knowing the ready access it would give, if successful, to their
Title:  intended victims.
Title:  
Title:  As Hawkeye ceased speaking, four human heads could be seen peering above a
Title:  few logs of drift-wood that had lodged on these naked rocks, and which had
Title:  probably suggested the idea of the practicability of the hazardous
Title:  undertaking. At the next moment, a fifth form was seen floating over the
Title:  green edge of the fall, a little from the line of the island. The savage
Title:  struggled powerfully to gain the point of safety, and, favored by the
Title:  glancing water, he was already stretching forth an arm to meet the grasp of
Title:  his companions, when he shot away again with the shirling current, appeared
Title:  to rise into the air, with uplifted arms and starting eyeballs, and fell,
Title:  with a sudden plunge, into that deep and yawning abyss over which he
Title:  hovered. A single, wild, despairing shriek rose from the cavern, and all was
Title:  hushed again as the grave.
Title:  
Title:  The first generous impulse of Duncan was to rush to the rescue of the
Title:  hapless wretch; but he felt himself bound to the spot by the iron grasp of
Title:  the immovable scout.
Title:  
Title:  Would ye bring certain death upon us, by telling the Mingoes where we lie?
Title:  demanded Hawkeye, sternly; 'Tis a charge of powder saved, and ammunition is
Title:  as precious now as breath to a worried deer! Freshen the priming of your
Title:  pistols - the midst of the falls is apt to dampen the brimstone - and stand
Title:  firm for a close struggle, while I fire on their rush.
Title:  
Title:  He placed a finger in his mouth, and drew a long, shrill whistle, which was
Title:  answered from the rocks that were guarded by the Mohicans. Duncan caught
Title:  glimpses of heads above the scattered drift-wood, as this signal rose on the
Title:  air, but they disappeared again as suddenly as they had glanced upon his
Title:  sight. A low, rustling sound next drew his attention behind him, and turning
Title:  his head, he beheld Uncas within a few feet, creeping to his side. Hawkeye
Title:  spoke to him in Delaware, when the young chief took his position with
Title:  singular caution and undisturbed coolness. To Heyward this was a moment of
Title:  feverish and impatient suspense; though the scout saw fit to select it as a
Title:  fit occasion to read a lecture to his more youthful associates on the art of
Title:  using firearms with discretion.
Title:  
Title:  Of all we'pons, he commenced, the long barreled, true-grooved, soft-metaled
Title:  rifle is the most dangerous in skillful hands, though it wants a strong arm,
Title:  a quick eye, and great judgment in charging, to put forth all its beauties.
Title:  The gunsmiths can have but little insight into their trade when they make
Title:  their fowling-pieces and short horsemen's - -
Title:  
Title:  He was interrupted by the low but expressive hugh of Uncas.
Title:  
Title:  I see them, boy, I see them! continued Hawkeye; they are gathering for the
Title:  rush, or they would keep their dingy backs below the logs. Well, let them,
Title:  he added, examining his flint; the leading man certainly comes on to his
Title:  death, though it should be Montcalm himself!
Title:  
Title:  At that moment the woods were filled with another burst of cries, and at the
Title:  signal four savages sprang from the cover of the driftwood. Heyward felt a
Title:  burning desire to rush forward to meet them, so intense was the delirious
Title:  anxiety of the moment; but he was restrained by the deliberate examples of
Title:  the scout and Uncas.
Title:  
Title:  When their foes, who had leaped over the black rocks that divided them, with
Title:  long bounds, uttering the wildest yells, were within a few rods, the rifle
Title:  of Hawkeye slowly rose among the shrubs, and poured out its fatal contents.
Title:  The foremost Indian bounded like a striken deer, and fell headlong among the
Title:  clefts of the island.
Title:  
Title:  Now, Uncas! cried the scout, drawing his long knife, while his quick eyes
Title:  began to flash with ardor, take the last of the screeching imps; of the
Title:  other two we are sartain!
Title:  
Title:  He was obeyed; and but two enemies remained to be overcome. Heyward had
Title:  given one of his pistols to Hawkeye, and together they rushed down a little
Title:  declivity toward their foes; they discharged their weapons at the same
Title:  instant, and equally without success.
Title:  
Title:  I know'd it! and I said it! muttered the scout, whirling the despised little
Title:  implement over the falls with bitter disdain. Come on, ye bloody minded
Title:  hell-hounds! ye meet a man without a cross!
Title:  
Title:  The words were barely uttered, when he encountered a savage of gigantic
Title:  stature, of the fiercest mien. At the same moment, Duncan found himself
Title:  engaged with the other, in a similar contest of hand to hand. With ready
Title:  skill, Hawkeye and his antagonist each grasped that uplifted arm of the
Title:  other which held the dangerous knife. For near a minute they stood looking
Title:  one another in the eye, and gradually exerting the power of their muscles
Title:  for the mastery.
Title:  
Title:  At length, the toughened sinews of the white man prevailed over the less
Title:  practiced limbs of the native. The arm of the latter slowly gave way before
Title:  the increasing force of the scout, who, suddenly wresting his armed hand
Title:  from the grasp of the foe, drove the sharp weapon through his naked bosom to
Title:  the heart. In the meantime, Heyward had been pressed in a more deadly
Title:  struggle. His slight sword was snapped in the first encounter. As he was
Title:  destitute of any other means of defense, his safety now depended entirely on
Title:  bodily strength and resolution. Though deficient in neither of these
Title:  qualities, he had met an enemy every way his equal. Happily, he soon
Title:  succeeded in disarming his adversary, whose knife fell on the rock at their
Title:  feet; and from this moment it became a fierce struggle who should cast the
Title:  other over the dizzy height into a neighboring cavern of the falls. Every
Title:  successive struggle brought them nearer to the verge, where Duncan perceived
Title:  the final and conquering effort must be made. Each of the combatants threw
Title:  all his energies into that effort, and the result was, that both tottered on
Title:  the brink of the precipice. Heyward felt the grasp of the other at his
Title:  throat, and saw the grim smile the savage gave, under the revengeful hope
Title:  that he hurried his enemy to a fate similar to his own, as he felt his body
Title:  slowly yielding to a resistless power, and the young man experienced the
Title:  passing agony of such a moment in all its horrors. At that instant of
Title:  extreme danger, a dark hand and glancing knife appeared before him; the
Title:  Indian released his hold, as the blood flowed freely from around the severed
Title:  tendons of the wrist; and while Duncan was drawn backward by the saving hand
Title:  of Uncas, his charmed eyes still were riveted on the fierce and disappointed
Title:  countenance of his foe, who fell sullenly and disappointed down the
Title:  irrecoverable precipice.
Title:  
Title:  To cover! to cover! cried Hawkeye, who just then had despatched the enemy;
Title:  to cover, for your lives! the work is but half ended!
Title:  
Title:  The young Mohican gave a shout of triumph, and followed by Duncan, he glided
Title:  up the acclivity they had descended to the combat, and sought the friendly
Title:  shelter of the rocks and shrubs.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 Mingo was the Delaware term of the Five Nations. Maquas was the name given
Title:  them by the Dutch. The French, from their first intercourse with them,
Title:  called them Iroquois.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 8
Title:  
Title:       They linger yet,
Title:       Avengers of their native land.
Title:  
Title:                                                                    GRAY
Title:  
Title:  The warning call of the scout was not uttered without occasion. During the
Title:  occurrence of the deadly encounter just related, the roar of the falls was
Title:  unbroken by any human sound whatever. It would seem that interest in the
Title:  result had kept the natives on the opposite shores in breathless suspense,
Title:  while the quick evolutions and swift changes in the positions of the
Title:  combatants effectually prevented a fire that might prove dangerous alike to
Title:  friend and enemy. But the moment the struggle was decided, a yell arose as
Title:  fierce and savage as wild and revengeful passions could throw into the air.
Title:  It was followed by the swift flashes of the rifles, which sent their leaden
Title:  messengers across the rock in volleys, as though the assailants would pour
Title:  out their impotent fury on the insensible scene of the fatal contest.
Title:  
Title:  A steady, though deliberate return was made from the rifle of Chingachgook,
Title:  who had maintained his post throughout the fray with unmoved resolution.
Title:  When the triumphant shout of Uncas was borne to his ears, the gratified
Title:  father raised his voice in a single responsive cry, after which his busy
Title:  piece alone proved that he still guarded his pass with unwearied diligence.
Title:  In this manner many minutes flew by with the swiftness of thought; the
Title:  rifles of the assailants speaking, at times, in rattling volleys, and at
Title:  others in occasional, scattering shots. Though the rock, the trees, and the
Title:  shrubs, were cut and torn in a hundred places around the besieged, their
Title:  cover was so close, and so rigidly maintained, that, as yet, David had been
Title:  the only sufferer in their little band.
Title:  
Title:  Let them burn their powder, said the deliberate scout, while bullet after
Title:  bullet whizzed by the place where he securely lay; there will be a fine
Title:  gathering of lead when it is over, and I fancy the imps will tire of the
Title:  sport afore these old stones cry out for mercy! Uncas, boy, you waste the
Title:  kernels by overcharging; and a kicking rifle never carries a true bullet. I
Title:  told you to take that loping miscreant under the line of white point; now,
Title:  if your bullet went a hair's breadth it went two inches above it. The life
Title:  lies low in a Mingo, and humanity teaches us to make a quick end to the
Title:  sarpents.
Title:  
Title:  A quiet smile lighted the haughty features of the young Mohican, betraying
Title:  his knowledge of the English language as well as of the other's meaning; but
Title:  he suffered it to pass away without vindication of reply.
Title:  
Title:  I cannot permit you to accuse Uncas of want of judgment or of skill, said
Title:  Duncan; he saved my life in the coolest and readiest manner, and he has made
Title:  a friend who never will require to be reminded of the debt he owes.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas partly raised his body, and offered his hand to the grasp of Heyward.
Title:  During this act of friendship, the two young men exchanged looks of
Title:  intelligence which caused Duncan to forget the character and condition of
Title:  his wild associate. In the meanwhile, Hawkeye, who looked on this burst of
Title:  youthful feeling with a cool but kind regard made the following reply:
Title:  
Title:  Life is an obligation which friends often owe each other in the wilderness.
Title:  I dare say I may have served Uncas some such turn myself before now; and I
Title:  very well remember that he has stood between me and death five different
Title:  times; three times from the Mingoes, once in crossing Horican, and - -
Title:  
Title:  That bullet was better aimed than common! exclaimed Duncan, involuntarily
Title:  shrinking from a shot which struck the rock at his side with a smart
Title:  rebound.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye laid his hand on the shapeless metal, and shook his head, as he
Title:  examined it, saying, Falling lead is never flattened, had it come from the
Title:  clouds this might have happened.
Title:  
Title:  But the rifle of Uncas was deliberately raised toward the heavens, directing
Title:  the eyes of his companions to a point, where the mystery was immediately
Title:  explained. A ragged oak grew on the right bank of the river, nearly opposite
Title:  to their position, which, seeking the freedom of the open space, had
Title:  inclined so far forward that its upper branches overhung that arm of the
Title:  stream which flowed nearest to its own shore. Among the topmost leaves,
Title:  which scantily concealed the gnarled and stunted limbs, a savage was
Title:  nestled, partly concealed by the trunk of the tree, and partly exposed, as
Title:  though looking down upon them to ascertain the effect produced by his
Title:  treacherous aim.
Title:  
Title:  These devils will scale heaven to circumvent us to our ruin, said Hawkeye;
Title:  keep him in play, boy, until I can bring killdeer to bear, when we will try
Title:  his metal on each side of the tree at once.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas delayed his fire until the scout uttered the word. The rifles flashed,
Title:  the leaves and bark of the oak flew into the air, and were scattered by the
Title:  wind, but the Indian answered their assault by a taunting laugh, sending
Title:  down upon them another bullet in return, that struck the cap of Hawkeye from
Title:  his head. Once more the savage yells burst out of the woods, and the leaden
Title:  hail whistled above the heads of the besieged, as if to confine them to a
Title:  place where they might become easy victims to the enterprise of the warrior
Title:  who had mounted the tree.
Title:  
Title:  This must be looked to, said the scout, glancing about him with an anxious
Title:  eye. Uncas, call up your father; we have need of all our we'pons to bring
Title:  the cunning varmint from his roost.
Title:  
Title:  The signal was instantly given; and, before Hawkeye had reloaded his rifle,
Title:  they were joined by Chingachgook. When his son pointed out to the
Title:  experienced warrior the situation of their dangerous enemy, the usual
Title:  exclamatory hugh burst from his lips; after which, no further expression of
Title:  surprise or alarm was suffered to escape him. Hawkeye and the Mohicans
Title:  conversed earnestly together in Delaware for a few moments, when each
Title:  quietly took his post, in order to execute the plan they had speedily
Title:  devised.
Title:  
Title:  The warrior in the oak had maintained a quick, though ineffectual fire, from
Title:  the moment of his discovery. But his aim was interrupted by the vigilance of
Title:  his enemies, whose rifles instantaneously bore on any part of his person
Title:  that was left exposed. Still his bullets fell in the center of the crouching
Title:  party. The clothes of Heyward, which rendered him peculiarly conspicuous,
Title:  were repeatedly cut, and once blood was drawn from a slight wound in his
Title:  arm.
Title:  
Title:  At length, emboldened by the long and patient watchfulness of his enemies,
Title:  the Huron attempted a better and more fatal aim. The quick eyes of the
Title:  Mohicans caught the dark line of his lower limbs incautiously exposed
Title:  through the thin foliage, a few inches from the trunk of the tree. Their
Title:  rifles made a common report, when, sinking on his wounded limb, part of the
Title:  body of the savage came into view. Swift as thought, Hawkeye seized the
Title:  advantage, and discharged his fatal weapon into the top of the oak. The
Title:  leaves were unusually agitated; the dangerous rifle fell from its commanding
Title:  elevation, and after a few moments of vain struggling, the form of the
Title:  savage was seen swinging in the wind, while he still grasped a ragged and
Title:  naked branch of the tree with hands clenched in desperation.
Title:  
Title:  Give him, in pity, give him the contents of another rifle, cried Duncan,
Title:  turning away his eyes in horror from the spectacle of a fellow creature in
Title:  such awful jeopardy.
Title:  
Title:  Not a karnel! exclaimed the obdurate Hawkeye; his death is certain, and we
Title:  have no powder to spare, for Indian fights sometimes last for days; tis
Title:  their scalps or ours! and God, who made us, has put into our natures the
Title:  craving to keep the skin on the head.
Title:  
Title:  Against this stern and unyielding morality, supported as it was by such
Title:  visible policy, there was no appeal. From that moment the yells in the
Title:  forest once more ceased, the fire was suffered to decline, and all eyes,
Title:  those of friends as well as enemies, became fixed on the hopeless condition
Title:  of the wretch who was dangling between heaven and earth. The body yielded to
Title:  the currents of air, and though no murmur or groan escaped the victim, there
Title:  were instants when he grimly faced his foes, and the anguish of cold despair
Title:  might be traced, through the intervening distance, in possession of his
Title:  swarthy lineaments. Three several times the scout raised his piece in mercy,
Title:  and as often, prudence getting the better of his intention, it was again
Title:  silently lowered. At length one hand of the Huron lost its hold, and dropped
Title:  exhausted to his side. A desperate and fruitless struggle to recover the
Title:  branch succeeded, and then the savage was seen for a fleeting instant,
Title:  grasping wildly at the empty air. The lightning is not quicker than was the
Title:  flame from the rifle of Hawkeye; the limbs of the victim trembled and
Title:  contracted, the head fell to the bosom, and the body parted the foaming
Title:  waters like lead, when the element closed above it, in its ceaseless
Title:  velocity, and every vestige of the unhappy Huron was lost forever.
Title:  
Title:  No shout of triumph succeeded this important advantage, but even the
Title:  Mohicans gazed at each other in silent horror. A single yell burst from the
Title:  woods, and all was again still. Hawkeye, who alone appeared to reason on the
Title:  occasion, shook his head at his own momentary weakness, even uttering his
Title:  self-disapprobation aloud.
Title:  
Title:  'Twas the last charge in my horn and the last bullet in my pouch, and 'twas
Title:  the act of a boy! he said; what mattered it whether he struck the rock
Title:  living or dead! feeling would soon be over. Uncas, lad, go down to the
Title:  canoe, and bring up the big horn; it is all the powder we have left, and we
Title:  shall need it to the last grain, or I am ignorant of the Mingo nature.
Title:  
Title:  The young Mohican complied, leaving the scout turning over the useless
Title:  contents of his pouch, and shaking the empty horn with renewed discontent.
Title:  From this unsatisfactory examination, however, he was soon called by a loud
Title:  and piercing exclamation from Uncas, that sounded, even to the unpracticed
Title:  ears of Duncan, as the signal of some new and unexpected calamity. Every
Title:  thought filled with apprehension for the previous treasure he had concealed
Title:  in the cavern, the young man started to his feet, totally regardless of the
Title:  hazard he incurred by such an exposure. As if actuated by a common impulse,
Title:  his movement was imitated by his companions, and, together they rushed down
Title:  the pass to the friendly chasm, with a rapidity that rendered the scattering
Title:  fire of their enemies perfectly harmless. The unwonted cry had brought the
Title:  sisters, together with the wounded David, from their place of refuge; and
Title:  the whole party, at a single glance, was made acquainted with the nature of
Title:  the disaster that had disturbed even the practiced stoicism of their
Title:  youthful Indian protector.
Title:  
Title:  At a short distance from the rock, their little bark was to be seen floating
Title:  across the eddy, toward the swift current of the river, in a manner which
Title:  proved that its course was directed by some hidden agent. The instant this
Title:  unwelcome sight caught the eye of the scout, his rifle was leveled as by
Title:  instinct, but the barrel gave no answer to the bright sparks of the flint.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis too late, 'tis too late! Hawkeye exclaimed, dropping the useless piece
Title:  in bitter disappointment; the miscreant has struck the rapid; and had we
Title:  powder, it could hardly send the lead swifter than he now goes!
Title:  
Title:  The adventurous Huron raised his head above the shelter of the canoe, and,
Title:  while it glided swiftly down the stream, he waved his hand, and gave forth
Title:  the shout, which was the known signal of success. His cry was answered by a
Title:  yell and a laugh from the woods, as tauntingly exulting as if fifty demons
Title:  were uttering their blasphemies at the fall of some Christian soul.
Title:  
Title:  Well may you laugh, ye children of the devil! said the scout, seating
Title:  himself on a projection of the rock, and suffering his gun to fall neglected
Title:  at his feet, for the three quickest and truest rifles in these woods are no
Title:  better than so many stalks of mullein, or the last year's horns of a buck!
Title:  
Title:  What is to be done? demanded Duncan, losing the first feeling of
Title:  disappointment in a more manly desire for exertion; what will become of us?
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye made no other reply than by passing his finger around the crown of
Title:  his head, in a manner so significant, that none who witnessed the action
Title:  could mistake its meaning.
Title:  
Title:  Surely, surely, our case is not so desperate! exclaimed the youth; the
Title:  Hurons are not here; we may make good the caverns, we may oppose their
Title:  landing.
Title:  
Title:  With what? coolly demanded the scout. The arrows of Uncas, or such tears as
Title:  women shed! No, no; you are young, and rich, and have friends, and at such
Title:  an age I know it is hard to die! But, glancing his eyes at the Mohicans, let
Title:  us remember we are men without a cross, and let us teach these natives of
Title:  the forest that white blood can run as freely as red, when the appointed
Title:  hour is come.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan turned quickly in the direction indicated by the other's eyes, and
Title:  read a confirmation of his worst apprehensions in the conduct of the
Title:  Indians. Chingachgook, placing himself in a dignified posture on another
Title:  fragment of the rock, had already laid aside his knife and tomahawk, and was
Title:  in the act of taking the eagle's plume from his head, and smoothing the
Title:  solitary tuft of hair in readiness to perform its last and revolting office.
Title:  His countenance was composed, though thoughtful, while his dark, gleaming
Title:  eyes were gradually losing the fierceness of the combat in an expression
Title:  better suited to the change he expected momentarily to undergo.
Title:  
Title:  Our case is not, cannot be so hopeless! said Duncan; even at this very
Title:  moment succor may be at hand. I see no enemies! They have sickened of a
Title:  struggle in which they risk so much with so little prospect of gain!
Title:  
Title:  It may be a minute, or it may be an hour, afore the wily sarpents steal upon
Title:  us, and it is quite in natur' for them to be lying within hearing at this
Title:  very moment, said Hawkeye; but come they will, and in such a fashion as will
Title:  leave us nothing to hope! Chingachgook - he spoke in Delaware - my brother,
Title:  we have fought our last battle together, and the Maquas will triumph in the
Title:  death of the sage man of the Mohicans, and of the pale face, whose eyes can
Title:  make night as day, and level the clouds to the mists of the springs!
Title:  
Title:  Let the Mingo women go weep over the slain! returned the Indian, with
Title:  characteristic pride and unmoved firmness; the Great Snake of the Mohicans
Title:  has coiled himself in their wigwams, and has poisoned their triumph with the
Title:  wailings of children, whose fathers have not returned! Eleven warriors lie
Title:  hid form the graves of their tribes since the snows have melted, and none
Title:  will tell where to find them when the tongue of Chingachgook shall be
Title:  silent! Let them draw the sharpest knife, and whirl the swiftest tomahawk,
Title:  for their bitterest enemy is in their hands. Uncas, topmost branch of a
Title:  noble trunk, call on the cowards to hasten, or their hearts will soften, and
Title:  they will change to women!
Title:  
Title:  They look among the fishes for their dead! returned the low, soft voice of
Title:  the youthful chieftain; the Hurons float with the slimy eels! They drop from
Title:  the oaks like fruit that is ready to be eaten! and the Delawares laugh!
Title:  
Title:  Ay, ay, muttered the scout, who had listened to this peculiar burst of the
Title:  natives with deep attention; they have warmed their Indian feelings, and
Title:  they'll soon provoke the Maquas to give them a speedy end. As for me, who am
Title:  of the whole blood of the whites, it is befitting that I should die as
Title:  becomes my color, with no words of scoffing in my mouth, and without
Title:  bitterness at the heart!
Title:  
Title:  Why die at all! said Cora, advancing from the place where natural horror
Title:  had, until this moment, held her riveted to the rock; the path is open on
Title:  every side; fly, then, to the woods, and call on God for succor. Go, brave
Title:  men, we owe you too much already; let us no longer involve you in our
Title:  hapless fortunes!
Title:  
Title:  You but little know the craft of the Iroquois, lady, if you judge they have
Title:  left the path open to the woods! returned Hawkeye, who, however, immediately
Title:  added in his simplicity, the down stream current, it is certain, might soon
Title:  sweep us beyond the reach of their rifles or the sound of their voices.
Title:  
Title:  Then try the river. Why linger to add to the number of the victims of our
Title:  merciless enemies?
Title:  
Title:  Why, repeated the scout, looking about him proudly; because it is better for
Title:  a man to die at peace with himself than to live haunted by an evil
Title:  conscience! What answer could we give Munro, when he asked us where and how
Title:  we left his children?
Title:  
Title:  Go to him, and say that you left them with a message to hasten to their aid,
Title:  returned Cora, advancing nigher to the scout in her generous ardor; that the
Title:  Hurons bear them into the northern wilds, but that by vigilance and speed
Title:  they may yet be rescued; and if, after all, it should please heaven that his
Title:  assistance come too late, bear to him, she continued, her voice gradually
Title:  lowering, until it seemed nearly choked, the love, the blessings, the final
Title:  prayers of his daughters, and bid him not mourn their early fate, but to
Title:  look forward with humble confidence to the Christian's goal to meet his
Title:  children.
Title:  
Title:  The hard, weather-beaten features of the scout began to work, and when she
Title:  had ended, he dropped his chin to his hand, like a man musing profoundly on
Title:  the nature of the proposal.
Title:  
Title:  There is reason in her words! at length broke from his compressed and
Title:  trembling lips; ay, and they bear the spirit of Christianity; what might be
Title:  right and proper in a red-skin, may be sinful in a man who has not even a
Title:  cross in blood to plead for his ignorance. Chingachgook! Uncas! hear you the
Title:  talk of the dark-eyed woman?
Title:  
Title:  He now spoke in Delaware to his companions, and his address, though calm and
Title:  deliberate, seemed very decided. The elder Mohican heard with deep gravity,
Title:  and appeared to ponder on his words, as though he felt the importance of
Title:  their import. After a moment of hesitation, he waved his hand in assent, and
Title:  uttered the English word Good! with the peculiar emphasis of his people.
Title:  Then, replacing his knife and tomahawk in his girdle, the warrior moved
Title:  silently to the edge of the rock which was most concealed from the banks of
Title:  the river. Here he paused a moment, pointed significantly to the woods
Title:  below, and saying a few words in his own language, as if indicating his
Title:  intended route, he dropped into the water, and sank from before the eyes of
Title:  the witnesses of his movements.
Title:  
Title:  The scout delayed his departure to speak to the generous girl, whose
Title:  breathing became lighter as she saw the success of her remonstrance.
Title:  
Title:  Wisdom is sometimes given to the young, as well as to the old, he said; and
Title:  what you have spoken is wise, not to call it by a better word. If you are
Title:  led into the woods, that is such of you as may be spared for awhile, break
Title:  the twigs on the bushes as you pass, and make the marks of your trail as
Title:  broad as you can, when, if mortal eyes can see them, depend on having a
Title:  friend who will follow to the ends of the 'arth afore he desarts you.
Title:  
Title:  He gave Cora an affectionate shake of the hand, lifted his rifle, and after
Title:  regarding it a moment with melancholy solicitude, laid it carefully aside,
Title:  and descended to the place where Chingachgook had just disappeared. For an
Title:  instant he hung suspended by the rock, and looking about him, with a
Title:  countenance of peculiar care, he added bitterly, Had the powder held out,
Title:  this disgrace could never have befallen! then, loosening his hold, the water
Title:  closed above his head, and he also became lost to view.
Title:  
Title:  All eyes now were turned on Uncas, who stood leaning against the ragged
Title:  rock, in immovable composure. After waiting a short time, Cora pointed down
Title:  the river, and said:
Title:  
Title:  Your friends have not been seen, and are now, most probably, in safety. Is
Title:  it not time for you to follow?
Title:  
Title:  Uncas will stay, the young Mohican calmly answered in English.
Title:  
Title:  To increase the horror of our capture, and to diminish the chances of our
Title:  release! Go, generous young man, Cora continued, lowering her eyes under the
Title:  gaze of the Mohican, and perhaps, with an intuitive consciousness of her
Title:  power; go to my father, as I have said, and be the most confidential of my
Title:  messengers. Tell him to trust you with the means to buy the freedom of his
Title:  daughters. Go!'tis my wish, 'tis my prayer, that you will go!
Title:  
Title:  The settled, calm look of the young chief changed to an expression of gloom,
Title:  but he no longer hesitated. With a noiseless step he crossed the rock, and
Title:  dropped into the troubled stream. Hardly a breath was drawn by those he left
Title:  behind, until they caught a glimpse of his head emerging for air, far down
Title:  the current, when he again sank, and was seen no more.
Title:  
Title:  These sudden and apparently successful experiments had all taken place in a
Title:  few minutes of that time which had now become so precious. After a last look
Title:  at Uncas, Cora turne,d and with a quivering lip, addressed herself to
Title:  Heyward:
Title:  
Title:  I have heard of your boasted skill in the water, too, Duncan, she said;
Title:  follow, then, the wise example set you by these simple and faithful beings.
Title:  
Title:  Is such the faith that Cora Munro would exact from her protector? said the
Title:  young man, smiling mournfully, but with bitterness.
Title:  
Title:  This is not a time for idle subtleties and false opinions, she answered; but
Title:  a moment when every duty should be equally considered. To us you can be of
Title:  no further service here, but your precious life may be saved for other and
Title:  nearer friends.
Title:  
Title:  He made no reply, though his eye fell wistfully on the beautiful form of
Title:  Alice, who was clinging to his arm with the dependency of an infant.
Title:  
Title:  Consider, continued Cora, after a pause, during which she seemed to struggle
Title:  with a pang even more acute than any that her fears had excited, that the
Title:  worst to us can be but death; a tribute that all must pay at the good time
Title:  of God's appointment.
Title:  
Title:  There are evils worse than death, said Duncan, speaking hoarsely, and as if
Title:  fretful at her importunity, but which the presence of one who would die in
Title:  your behalf may avert.
Title:  
Title:  Cora ceased her entreaties; and veiling her face in her shawl, drew the
Title:  nearly insensible Alice after her into the deepest recess of the inner
Title:  cavern.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 9
Title:  
Title:       Be gay securely;
Title:       Dispel, my fair, with smiles, the tim'rous clouds,
Title:       That hang on thy clear brow.
Title:  
Title:                                                      DEATH OF AGRIPPINA
Title:  
Title:  The sudden and almost magical change, from the stirring incidents of the
Title:  combat to the stillness that now reigned around him, acted on the heated
Title:  imagination of Heyward like some exciting dream. While all the images and
Title:  events he had witnessed remained deeply impressed on his memory, he felt a
Title:  difficulty in persuading him of their truth. Still ignorant of the fate of
Title:  those who had trusted to the aid of the swift current, he at first listened
Title:  intently to any signal or sounds of alarm, which might announce the good or
Title:  evil fortune of their hazardous undertaking. His attention was, however,
Title:  bestowed in vain; for with the disappearance of Uncas, every sign of the
Title:  adventurers had been lost, leaving him in total uncertainty of their fate.
Title:  
Title:  In a moment of such painful doubt, Duncan did not hesitate to look around
Title:  him, without consulting that protection from the rocks which just before had
Title:  been so necessary to his safety. Every effort, however, to detect the least
Title:  evidence of the approach of their hidden enemies was as fruitless as the
Title:  inquiry after his late companions. The wooded banks of the river seemed
Title:  again deserted by everything possessing animal life. The uproar which had so
Title:  lately echoed through the vaults of the forest was gone, leaving the rush of
Title:  the waters to swell and sink on the currents of the air, in the unmingled
Title:  sweetness of nature. A fish-hawk, which, secure on the topmost branches of a
Title:  dead pine, had been a distant spectator of the fray, now swooped form his
Title:  high and ragged perch, and soared, in wide sweeps, above his prey; while a
Title:  jay, whose noisy voice had been stilled by the hoarser cries of the savages,
Title:  ventured again to open his discordant throat, as though once more in
Title:  undisturbed possession of his wild domains. Duncan caught from these natural
Title:  accompaniments of the solitary scene a glimmering of hope; and he began to
Title:  rally his faculties to renewed exertions, with something like a reviving
Title:  confidence of success.
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons are not to be seen, he said, addressing David, who had by no
Title:  means recovered from the effects of the stunning blow he had received; let
Title:  us conceal ourselves in the cavern, and trust the rest to Providence.
Title:  
Title:  I remember to have united with two comely maidens, in lifting up our voices
Title:  in praise and thanksgiving, returned the bewildered singing-master; since
Title:  which time I have been visited by a heavy judgment for my sins. I have been
Title:  mocked with the likensss of sleep, while sounds of discord have rent my
Title:  ears, such as might manifest the fullness of time, and that nature had
Title:  forgotten her harmony.
Title:  
Title:  Poor fellow! thine own period was, in truth, near its accomplishment! But
Title:  arouse, and come with me; I will lead you where all other sounds but those
Title:  of your own psalmody shall be excluded.
Title:  
Title:  There is melody in the fall of the cataract, and the rushing of many waters
Title:  is sweet to the senses! said David, pressing his hand confusedly on his
Title:  brow. Is not the air yet filled with shrieks and cries, as though the
Title:  departed spirits of the damned - -
Title:  
Title:  Not now, not now, interrupted the impatient Heyward, they have ceased, and
Title:  they who raised them, I trust in God, they are gone, too! everything but the
Title:  water is still and at peace; in, then, where you may create those sounds you
Title:  love so well to hear.
Title:  
Title:  David smiled sadly, though not without a momentary gleam of pleasure, at
Title:  this allusion to his beloved vocation. He no longer hesitated to be led to a
Title:  spot which promised such unalloyed gratification to his wearied senses; and
Title:  leaning on the arm of his companion, he entered the narrow mouth of the
Title:  cave. Duncan seized a pile of the sassafras, which he drew before the
Title:  passage, studiously concealing every appearance of an aperture. Within this
Title:  fragile barrier he arranged the blankets abandoned by the foresters,
Title:  darkening the inner extremity of the cavern, while its outer received a
Title:  chastened light from the narrow ravine, through which one arm of the river
Title:  rushed to form the junction with its sister branch a few rods below.
Title:  
Title:  I like not the principle of the natives, which teaches them to submit
Title:  without a struggle, in emergencies that appear desperate, he said, while
Title:  busied in this employment; our own maxim, which says, while life remains
Title:  there is hope, is more consoling, and better suited to a soldier's
Title:  temperament. To you, Cora, I will urge no words of idle encouragement; your
Title:  own fortitude and undisturbed reason will teach you all that may become your
Title:  sex; but cannot we dry the tears of that trembling weeper on your bosom?
Title:  
Title:  I am calmer, Duncan, said Alice, raising herself from the arms of her
Title:  sister, and forcing an appearance of composure through her tears; much
Title:  calmer, now. Surely, in this hidden spot we are safe, we are secret, free
Title:  from injury; we will hope everything from those generous men who have risked
Title:  so much already in our behalf.
Title:  
Title:  Now does our gentle Alice speak like a daughter of Munro! said Heyward,
Title:  pausing to press her hand as he passed toward the outer entrance of the
Title:  cavern. With two such examples of courage before him, a man would be ashamed
Title:  to prove other than a hero. He then seated himself in the center of the
Title:  cavern, grasping his remaining pistol with a hand convulsively clenched,
Title:  while his contracted and frowning eye announced the sullen desperation of
Title:  his purpose. The Hurons, if they come, may not gain our position so easily
Title:  as they think, he slowly muttered; and propping his head back against the
Title:  rock, he seemed to await the result in patience, though his gaze was
Title:  unceasingly bent on the open avenue to their place of retreat.
Title:  
Title:  With the last sound of his voice, a deep, a long, and almost breathless
Title:  silence succeeded. The fresh air of the morning had penetrated the recess,
Title:  and its influence was gradually felt on the spirits of its inmates. As
Title:  minute after minute passed by, leaving them in undisturbed security, the
Title:  insinuating feeling of hope was gradually gaining possession of every bosom,
Title:  though each one felt reluctant to give utterance to expectations that the
Title:  next moment might so fearfully destroy.
Title:  
Title:  David alone formed an exception to these varying emotions. A gleam of light
Title:  from the opening crossed his wan countenance, and fell upon the pages of the
Title:  little volume, whose leaves he was again occupied in turning, as if
Title:  searching for some song more fitted to their condition than any that had yet
Title:  met their eye. He was, most probably, acting all this time under a confused
Title:  recollection of the promised consolation of Duncan. At length, it would
Title:  seem, his patient industry found its reward; for, without explanation or
Title:  apology, he pronounced aloud the words Isle of Wight, drew a long, sweet
Title:  sound from his pitch-pipe, and then ran through the preliminary modulations
Title:  of the air whose name he had just mentioned, with the sweeter tones of his
Title:  own musical voice.
Title:  
Title:  May not this prove dangerous? asked Cora, glancing her dark eye at Major
Title:  Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Poor fellow! his voice is too feeble to be heard above the din of the falls,
Title:  was the answer; beside, the cavern will prove his friend. Let him indulge
Title:  his passions since it may be done without hazard.
Title:  
Title:  Isle of Wight! repeated David, looking about him with that dignity with
Title:  which he had long been wont to silence the whispering echoes of his school;
Title:  'tis a brave tune, and set to solemn words! let it be sung with meet
Title:  respect!
Title:  
Title:  After allowing a moment of stillness to enforce his discipline, the voice of
Title:  the singer was heard, in low, murmuring syllables, gradually stealing on the
Title:  ear, until it filled the narrow vault with sounds rendered trebly thrilling
Title:  by the feeble and tremulous utterance produced by his debility. The melody,
Title:  which no weakness could destroy, gradually wrought its sweet influence on
Title:  the senses of those who heard it. It even prevailed over the miserable
Title:  travesty of the song of David which the singer had selected from a volume of
Title:  similar effusions, and caused the sense to be forgotten in the insinuating
Title:  harmony of the sounds. Alice unconsciously dried her tears, and bent her
Title:  melting eyes on the pallid features of Gamut, with an expression of
Title:  chastened delight that she neither affected or wished to conceal. Cora
Title:  bestowed an approving smile on the pious efforts of the namesake of the
Title:  Jewish prince, and Heyward soon turned his steady, stern look from the
Title:  outlet of the cavern, to fasten it, with a milder character, on the face of
Title:  David, or to meet the wandering beams which at moments strayed from the
Title:  humid eyes of Alice. The open sympathy of the listeners stirred the spirit
Title:  of the votary of music, whose voice regained its richness and volume,
Title:  without losing that touching softness which proved its secret charm.
Title:  Exerting his renovated powers to their utmost, he was yet filling the arches
Title:  of the cave with long and full tones, when a yell burst into the air
Title:  without, that instantly stilled his pious strains, choking his voice
Title:  suddenly, as though his heart had literally bounded into the passage of his
Title:  throat.
Title:  
Title:  We are lost! exclaimed Alice, throwing herself into the arms of Cora.
Title:  
Title:  Not yet, not yet, returned the agitated but undaunted Heyward: the sound
Title:  came from the center of the island, and it has been produced by the sight of
Title:  their dead companions. We are not yet discovered, and there is still hope.
Title:  
Title:  Faint and almost despairing as was the prospect of escape, the words of
Title:  Duncan were not thrown away, for it awakened the powers of the sisters in
Title:  such a manner that they awaited the results in silence. A second yell soon
Title:  followed the first, when a rush of voices was heard pouring down the island,
Title:  from its upper to its lower extremity, until they reached the naked rock
Title:  above the caverns, where, after a shout of savage triumph, the air continued
Title:  full of horrible cries and screams, such as man alone can utter, and he only
Title:  when in a state of the fiercest barbarity.
Title:  
Title:  The sounds quickly spread around them in every direction. Some called to
Title:  their fellows from the water's edge, and were answered from the heights
Title:  above. Cries were heard in the startling vicinity of the chasm between the
Title:  two caves, which mingled with hoarser yells that arose out of the abyss of
Title:  the deep ravine. In short, so rapidly had the savage sounds diffused
Title:  themselves over the barren rock, that it was not difficult for the anxious
Title:  listeners to imagine they could be heard beneath, as in truth they were
Title:  above on every side of them.
Title:  
Title:  In the midst of this tumult, a triumphant yell was raised within a few yards
Title:  of the hidden entrance to the cave. Heyward abandoned every hope, with the
Title:  belief it was the signal that they were discovered. Again the impression
Title:  passed away, as he heard the voices collect near the spot where the white
Title:  man had so reluctantly abandoned his rifle. Amid the jargon of Indian
Title:  dialects that he now plainly heard, it was easy to distinguish not only
Title:  words, but sentences, in the patois of the Canadas. A burst of voices had
Title:  shouted simultaneously, La Longue Carabine! causing the oppostie woods to
Title:  re-echo with a name which, Heyward well remembered, had been given by his
Title:  enemies to a celebrated hunter and scout of the English camp, and who, he
Title:  now learned for the first time, had been his late companion.
Title:  
Title:  La Longue Carabine! La Longue Carabine! passed from mouth to mouth, until
Title:  the whole band appeared to be collected around a trophy which would seem to
Title:  announce the death of its formidable owner. After a vociferous consultation,
Title:  which was, at times, deafened by bursts of savage joy, they again separated,
Title:  filling the air with the name of a foe, whose body, Heywood could collect
Title:  from their expressions, they hoped to find concealed in some crevice of the
Title:  island.
Title:  
Title:  Now, he whispered to the trembling sisters, now is the moment of
Title:  uncertainty! if our place of retreat escape this scrutiny, we are still
Title:  safe! In every event, we are assured, by what has fallen from our enemies,
Title:  that our friends have escaped, and in two short hours we may look for succor
Title:  from Webb.
Title:  
Title:  There were now a few minutes of fearful stillness, during which Heyward well
Title:  knew that the savages conducted their search with greater vigilance and
Title:  method. More than once he could distinguish their footsteps, as they brushed
Title:  the sassafras, causing the faded leaves to rustle, and the branches to snap.
Title:  At length, the pile yielded a little, a corner of a blanket fell, and a
Title:  faint ray of light gleamed into the inner part of the cave. Cora folded
Title:  Alice to her bosom in agony, and Duncan sprang to his feet. A shout was at
Title:  that moment heard, as if issuing from the center of the rock, announcing
Title:  that the neighboring cavern had at length been entered. In a minute, the
Title:  number and loudness of the voices indicated that the whole party was
Title:  collected in and around that secret place.
Title:  
Title:  As the inner passages to the two caves were so close to each other, Duncan,
Title:  believing that escape was no longer possible, passed David and the sisters,
Title:  to place himself between the latter and the first onset of the terrible
Title:  meeting. Grown desperate by his situation, he drew nigh the slight barrier
Title:  which separated him only by a few feet from his relentless pursuers, and
Title:  placing his face to the casual opening, he even looked out with a sort of
Title:  desperate indifference, on their movements.
Title:  
Title:  Within reach of his arm was the brawny shoulder of a gigantic Indian, whose
Title:  deep and authoritative voice appeared to give directions to the proceedings
Title:  of his fellows. Beyond him again, Duncan could look into the vault opposite,
Title:  which was filled with savages, upturning and rifling the humble furniture of
Title:  the scout. The wound of David had dyed the leaves of sassafras with a color
Title:  that the native well knew as anticipating the season. Over this sign of
Title:  their success, they sent up a howl, like an opening from so many hounds who
Title:  had recovered a lost trail. After this yell of victory, they tore up the
Title:  fragrant bed of the cavern, and bore the branches into the chasm, scattering
Title:  the boughs, as if they suspected them of concealing the person of the man
Title:  they had so long hated and feared. One fierce and wild-looking warrior
Title:  approached the chief, bearing a load of the brush, and pointing exultingly
Title:  to the deep red stains with which it was sprinkled, uttered his joy in
Title:  Indian yells, whose meaning Heyward was only enabled to comprehend by the
Title:  frequent repetition of the name La Longue Carabine! When his triumph had
Title:  ceased, he cast the brush on the slight heap Duncan had made before the
Title:  entrance of the second cavern, and closed the view. His example was followed
Title:  by others, who, as they drew the branches from the cave of the scout, threw
Title:  them into one pile, adding, unconsciously, to the security of those they
Title:  sought. The very slightness of the defense was its chief merit, for no one
Title:  thought of disturbing a mass of brush, which all of them believed, in that
Title:  moment of hurry and confusion, had been accidentally raised by the hands of
Title:  their own party.
Title:  
Title:  As the blankets yielded before the outward pressure, and the branches
Title:  settled in the fissure of the rock by their own weight, forming a compact
Title:  body, Duncan once more breathed freely. With a light step and lighter heart,
Title:  he returned to the center of the cave, and took the place he had left, where
Title:  he could command a view of the opening next the river. While he was in the
Title:  act of making this movement, the Indians, as if changing their purpose by a
Title:  common impulse, broke away from the chasm in a body, and were heard rushing
Title:  up the island again, toward the point whence they had originally descended.
Title:  Here another wailing cry betrayed that they were again collected around the
Title:  bodies of their dead comrades.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan now ventured to look at his companions; for, during the most critical
Title:  moments of their danger, he had been apprehensive that the anxiety of his
Title:  countenance might communicate some additional alarm to those who were so
Title:  little able to sustain it.
Title:  
Title:  They are gone, Cora! he whispered; Alice, they are returned whence they
Title:  came, and we are saved! To Heaven, that has alone delivered us from the
Title:  grasp of so merciless an enemy, be all the praise!
Title:  
Title:  Then to Heaven will I return my thanks! exclaimed the younger sister, rising
Title:  from the encircling arm of Cora, and casting herself with enthusiastic
Title:  gratitude on the naked rock; to that Heaven who has spared the tears of a
Title:  gray-headed father; has saved the lives of those I so much love.
Title:  
Title:  Both Heyward and the more temperate Cora witnessed the act of involuntary
Title:  emotion with powerful sympathy, the former secretly believing that piety had
Title:  never worn a form so lovely as it had now assumed in the youthful person of
Title:  Alice. Her eyes were radiant with the glow of grateful feelings; the flush
Title:  of her beauty was again seated on her cheeks, and her whole soul seemed
Title:  ready and anxious to pour out its thanksgivings through the medium of her
Title:  eloquent features. But when her lips moved, the words they should have
Title:  uttered appeared frozen by some new and sudden chill. Her bloom gave place
Title:  to the paleness of death; her soft and melting eyes grew hard, and seemed
Title:  contracting with horror; while those hands, which she had raised, clasped in
Title:  each other, towardheaven, dropped in horizontal lines before her, the
Title:  fingers pointed forward in convulsed motion. Heyward turned the instant she
Title:  gave a direction to his suspicions, and peering just above the ledge which
Title:  formed the threshold of the open outlet of the cavern, he beheld the
Title:  malignant, fierce and savage features of Le Renard Subtil.
Title:  
Title:  In that moment of surprise, the self-possession of Heyward did not desert
Title:  him. He observed by the vacant expression of the Indian's countenance, that
Title:  his eye, accustomed to the open air had not yet been able to penetrate the
Title:  dusky light which pervaded the depth of the cavern. He had even thought of
Title:  retreating beyond a curvature in the natural wall, which might still conceal
Title:  him and his companions, when by the sudden gleam of intelligence that shot
Title:  across the features of the savage, he saw it was too late, and that they
Title:  were betrayed.
Title:  
Title:  The look of exultation and brutal triumph which announced this terrible
Title:  truth was irresistibly irritating. Forgetful of everything but the impulses
Title:  of his hot blood, Duncan levelled his pistol and fired. The report of the
Title:  weapon made the cavern bellow like an eruption from a volcano; and when the
Title:  smoke it vomited had been driven away before the current of air which issued
Title:  from the ravine the place so lately occupied by the features of his
Title:  treacherous guide was vacant. Rushing to the outlet, Heyward caught a
Title:  glimpse of his dark figure stealing around a low and narrow ledge, which
Title:  soon hid him entirely from sight.
Title:  
Title:  Among the savages a frightful stillness succeeded the explosion, which had
Title:  just been heard bursting from the bowels of the rock. But when Le Renard
Title:  raised his voice in a long and intelligible whoop, it was answered by a
Title:  spontaneous yell from the mouth of every Indian within hearing of the sound.
Title:  
Title:  The clamorous noises again rushed down the island; and before Duncan had
Title:  time to recover from the shock, his feeble barrier of brush was scattered to
Title:  the winds, the cavern was entered at both its extremities, and he and his
Title:  companions were dragged from their shelter and borne into the day, where
Title:  they stood surrounded by the whole band of the triumphant Hurons.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 10
Title:  
Title:       I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn
Title:       As much as we this night have overwatched!
Title:  
Title:                                                 MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
Title:  
Title:  The instant the shock of this sudden misfortune had abated, Duncan began to
Title:  make his observations on the appearance and proceedings of their captors.
Title:  Contrary to the usages of the natives in the wantonness of their success
Title:  they had respected, not only the persons of the trembling sisters, but his
Title:  own. The rich ornaments of his military attire had indeed been repeatedly
Title:  handled by different individuals of the tribes with eyes expressing a savage
Title:  longing to possess the baubles; but before the customary violence could be
Title:  resorted to, a mandate in the authoritative voice of the large warrior,
Title:  already mentioned, stayed the uplifted hand, and convinced Heyward that they
Title:  were to be reserved for some object of particular moment.
Title:  
Title:  While, however, these manifestations of weakness were exhibited by the young
Title:  and vain of the party, the more experienced warriors continued their search
Title:  throughout both caverns, with an activity that denoted they were far from
Title:  being satisfied with those fruits of their conquest which had already been
Title:  brought to light. Unable to discover any new victim, these diligent workers
Title:  of vengeance soon approached their male prisoners, pronouncing the name La
Title:  Longue Carabine, with a fierceness that could not be easily mistaken. Duncan
Title:  affected not to comprehend the meaning of their repeated and violent
Title:  interrogatories, while his companion was spared the effort of a similar
Title:  deception by his ignorance of French. Wearied at length by their
Title:  importunities, and apprehensive of irritating his captors by too stubborn a
Title:  silence, the former looked about him in quest of Magua, who might interpret
Title:  his answers to questions which were at each moment becoming more earnest and
Title:  threatening.
Title:  
Title:  The conduct of this savage had formed a solitary exception to that of all
Title:  his fellows. While the others were busily occupied in seeking to gratify
Title:  their childish passion for finery, by plundering even the miserable effects
Title:  of the scout, or had been searching with such bloodthirsty vengeance in
Title:  their looks for their absent owner, Le Renard had stood at a little distance
Title:  from the prisoners, with a demeanor so quiet and satisfied, as to betray
Title:  that he had already effected the grand purpose of his treachery. When the
Title:  eyes of Heyward first met those of his recent guide, he turned them away in
Title:  horror at the sinister though calm look he encountered. Conquering his
Title:  disgust, however, he was able, with an averted face, to address his
Title:  successful enemy.
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard Subtil is too much of a warrior, said the reluctant Heyward, to
Title:  refuse telling an unarmed man what his conquerors say.
Title:  
Title:  They ask for the hunter who knows the paths through the woods, returned
Title:  Magua, in his broken English, laying his hand, at the same time, with a
Title:  ferocious smile, on the bundle of leaves with which a wound on his own
Title:  shoulder was bandaged. La Longue Carabine'! his rifle is good, and his eye
Title:  never shut; but, like the short gun of the white chief, it is nothing
Title:  against the life of Le Subtil.
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard is too brave to remember the hurts received in war, or the hands
Title:  that gave them.
Title:  
Title:  Was it war, when the tired Indian rested at the sugartree to taste his corn!
Title:  who filled the bushes with creeping enemies! who drew the knife, whose
Title:  tongue was peace, while his heart was colored with blood! Did Magua say that
Title:  the hatchet was out of the ground, and that his hand had dug it up?
Title:  
Title:  As Duncan dared not retort upon his accuser by reminding him of his own
Title:  premeditated treachery, and disdained to deprecate his resentment by any
Title:  words of apology, he remained silent. Magua seemed also content to rest the
Title:  controversy as well as all further communication there, for he resumed the
Title:  leaning attitude against the rock from which, in momentary energy, he had
Title:  arisen. But the cry of La Longue Carabine was renewed the instant the
Title:  impatient savages perceived that the short dialogue was ended.
Title:  
Title:  You hear, said Magua, with stubborn indifference: the red Hurons call for
Title:  the life of The Long Rifle, or they will have the blood of him that keep him
Title:  hid!
Title:  
Title:  He is gone - escaped; he is far beyond their reach.
Title:  
Title:  Renard smiled with cold contempt, as he answered:
Title:  
Title:  When the white man dies, he thinks he is at peace; but the red men know how
Title:  to torture even the ghosts of their enemies. Where is his body? Let the
Title:  Hurons see his scalp.
Title:  
Title:  He is not dead, but escaped.
Title:  
Title:  Magua shook his head incredulously.
Title:  
Title:  Is he a bird, to spread his wings; or is he a fish, to swim without air! The
Title:  white chief read in his books, and he believes the Hurons are fools!
Title:  
Title:  Though no fish, The Long Rifle can swim. He floated down the stream when the
Title:  powder was all burned, and when the eyes of the Hurons were behind a cloud.
Title:  
Title:  And why did the white chief stay? demanded the still incredulous Indian. Is
Title:  he a stone that goes to the bottom, or does the scalp burn his head?
Title:  
Title:  That I am not stone, your dead comrade, who fell into the falls, might
Title:  answer, were the life still in him, said the provoked young man, using, in
Title:  his anger, that boastful language which was most likely to excite the
Title:  admiration of an Indian. The white man thinks none but cowards desert their
Title:  women.
Title:  
Title:  Magua muttered a few words, inaudibly, between his teeth, before he
Title:  continued, aloud:
Title:  
Title:  Can the Delawares swim, too, as well as crawl in the bushes? Where is Le
Title:  Gros Serpent?
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, who perceived by the use of these Canadian appellations, that his
Title:  late companions were much better known to his enemies than to himself,
Title:  answered, reluctantly: He also is gone down with the water.
Title:  
Title:  Le Cerf Agile is not here?
Title:  
Title:  I know not whom you call The Nimble Deer, said Duncan gladly profiting by
Title:  any excuse to create delay.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas, returned Magua, pronouncing the Delaware name with even greater
Title:  difficulty than he spoke his English words. Bounding Elk is what the white
Title:  man says, when he calls to the young Mohican.
Title:  
Title:  Here is some confusion in names between us, Le Renard, said Duncan, hoping
Title:  to provoke a discussion. Daim is the French for deer, and cerf for stag;
Title:  lan is the true term, when one would speak of an elk.
Title:  
Title:  Yes, muttered the Indian, in his native tongue; the pale faces are prattling
Title:  women! they have two words for each thing, while a red-skin will make the
Title:  sound of his voice speak to him. Then, changing his language, he continued,
Title:  adhering to the imperfect nomenclature of his provincial instructors. The
Title:  deer is swift, but weak; the elk is swift, but strong; and the son of Le
Title:  Serpent is Le Cerf Agile. Has he leaped the river to the woods?
Title:  
Title:  If you mean the younger Delaware, he, too, has gone down with the water.
Title:  
Title:  As there was nothing improbable to an Indian in the manner of the escape,
Title:  Magua admitted the truth of what he had heard, with a readiness that
Title:  afforded additional evidence how little he would prize such worthless
Title:  captives. With his companions, however, the feeling was manifestly
Title:  different.
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons had awaited the result of this short dialogue with characteristic
Title:  patience, and with a silence that increased until there was a general
Title:  stillness in the band. When Heyward ceased to speak, they turned their eyes,
Title:  as one man, on Magua, demanding, in this expressive manner, an explanation
Title:  of what had been said. Their interpreter pointed to the river, and made them
Title:  acquainted with the result, as much by the action as by the few words he
Title:  uttered. When the fact was generally understood, the savages raised a
Title:  frightful yell, which declared the extent of their disappointment. Some ran
Title:  furiously to the water's edge, beating the air with frantic gestures, while
Title:  others spat upon the element, to resent the supposed treason it had
Title:  committed against their acknowledged rights as conquerors. A few, and they
Title:  not the least powerful and terrific of the band, threw lowering looks, in
Title:  which the fiercest passion was only tempered by habitual self-command, at
Title:  those captives who still remained in their power, while one or two even gave
Title:  vent to their malignant feelings by the most menacing gestures, against
Title:  which neither the sex nor the beauty of the sisters was any protection. The
Title:  young soldier made a desperate but fruitless effort to spring to the side of
Title:  Alice, when he saw the dark hand of a savage twisted in the rich tresses
Title:  which were flowing in volumes over her shoulders, while a knife was passed
Title:  around the head from which they fell, as if to denote the horrid manner in
Title:  which it was about to be robbed of its beautiful ornament. But his hands
Title:  were bound; and at the first movement he made, he felt the grasp of the
Title:  powerful Indian who directed the band, pressing his shoulder like a vise.
Title:  Immediately conscious how unavailing any struggle against such an
Title:  overwhelming force must prove, he submitted to his fate, encouraging his
Title:  gentle companions by a few low and tender assurances, that the natives
Title:  seldom failed to threaten more than they performed.
Title:  
Title:  But while Duncan resorted to these words of consolation to quiet the
Title:  apprehensions of the sisters, he was not so weak as to deceive himself. He
Title:  well knew that the authority of an Indian chief was so little conventional,
Title:  that it was oftener maintained by physical superiority than by any moral
Title:  supremacy he might possess. The danger was, therefore, magnified exactly in
Title:  proportion to the number of the savage spirits by which they were
Title:  surrounded. The most positive mandate from him who seemed the acknowledged
Title:  leader, was liable to be violated at each moment by any rash hand that might
Title:  choose to sacrifice a victim to the manes of some dead friend or relative.
Title:  While, therefore, he sustained an outward appearance of calmness and
Title:  fortitude, his heart leaped into his throat, whenever any of their fierce
Title:  captors drew nearer than common to the helpless sisters, or fastened one of
Title:  their sullen, wandering looks on those fragile forms which were so little
Title:  able to resist the slightest assault.
Title:  
Title:  His apprehensions were, however, greatly relieved, when he saw that the
Title:  leader had summoned his warriors to himself in counsel. Their deliberations
Title:  were short, and it would seem, by the silence of most of the party, the
Title:  decision unanimous. By the frequency with which the few speakers pointed in
Title:  the direction of the encampment of Webb, it was apparent they dreaded the
Title:  approach of danger from that quarter. This consideration probably hastened
Title:  their determination, and quickened the subsequent movements.
Title:  
Title:  During his short conference, Heyward, finding a respite from his gravest
Title:  fears, had leisure to admire the cautious manner in which the Hurons had
Title:  made their approaches, even after hostilities had ceased.
Title:  
Title:  It has already been stated that the upper half of the island was a naked
Title:  rock, and destitute of any other defenses than a few scattered logs of
Title:  driftwood. They had selected this point to make their descent, having borne
Title:  the canoe through the wood around the cataract for that purpose. Placing
Title:  their arms in the little vessel a dozen men clinging to its sides had
Title:  trusted themselves to the direction of the canoe, which was controlled by
Title:  two of the most skillful warriors, in attitudes that enabled them to command
Title:  a view of the dangerous passage. Favored by this arrangement, they touched
Title:  the head of the island at that point which had proved so fatal to their
Title:  first adventurers, but with the advantages of superior numbers, and the
Title:  possession of firearms. That such had been the manner of their descent was
Title:  rendered quite apparent to Duncan; for they now bore the light bark from the
Title:  upper end of the rock, and placed it in the water, near the mouth of the
Title:  outer cavern. As soon as this change was made, the leader made signs to the
Title:  prisoners to descend and enter.
Title:  
Title:  As resistance was impossible, and remonstrance useless, Heyward set the
Title:  example of submission, by leading the way into the canoe, where he was soon
Title:  seated with the sisters and the still wondering David. Notwithstanding the
Title:  Hurons were necessarily ignorant of the little channels among the eddies and
Title:  rapids of the stream, they knew the common signs of such a navigation too
Title:  well to commit any material blunder. When the pilot chosen for the task of
Title:  guiding the canoe had taken his station, the whole band plunged again into
Title:  the river, the vessel glided down the current, and in a few moments the
Title:  captives found themselves on the south bank of the stream, nearly opposite
Title:  to the point where they had struck it the preceding evening.
Title:  
Title:  Here was held another short but earnest consultation, during which the
Title:  horses, to whose panic their owners ascribed their heaviest misfortune, were
Title:  led from the cover of the woods, and brought to the sheltered spot. The band
Title:  now divided. The great chief, so often mentioned, mounting the charger of
Title:  Heyward, led the way directly across the river, followed by most of his
Title:  people, and disappeared in the woods, leaving the prisoners in charge of six
Title:  savages, at whose head was Le Renard Subtil. Duncan witnessed all their
Title:  movements with renewed uneasiness.
Title:  
Title:  He had been fond of believing, from the uncommon forbearance of the savages,
Title:  that he was reserved as a prisoner to be delivered to Montcalm. As the
Title:  thoughts of those who are in misery seldom slumber, and the invention is
Title:  never more lively than when it is stimulated by hope, however feeble and
Title:  remote, he had even imagined that the parental feelings of Munro were to be
Title:  made instrumental in seducing him from his duty to the king. For though the
Title:  French commander bore a high character for courage and enterprise, he was
Title:  also thought to be expert in those political practises which do not always
Title:  respect the nicer obligations of morality, and which so generally disgraced
Title:  the European diplomacy of that period.
Title:  
Title:  All those busy and ingenious speculations were now annihilated by the
Title:  conduct of his captors. That portion of the band who had followed the huge
Title:  warrior took the route toward the foot of the Horican, and no other
Title:  expectation was left for himself and companions, than that they were to be
Title:  retained as hopeless captives by their savage conquerors. Anxious to know
Title:  the worst, and willing, in such an emergency, to try the potency of gold he
Title:  overcame his reluctance to speak to Magua. Addressing himself to his former
Title:  guide, who had now assumed the authority and manner of one who was to direct
Title:  the future movements of the party, he said, in tones as friendly and
Title:  confiding as he could assume:
Title:  
Title:  I would speak to Magua, what is fit only for so great a chief to hear.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian turned his eyes on the young soldier scornfully, as he answered:
Title:  
Title:  Speak; trees have no ears.
Title:  
Title:  But the red Hurons are not deaf; and counsel that is fit for the great men
Title:  of a nation would make the young warriors drunk. If Magua will not listen,
Title:  the officer of the king knows how to be silent.
Title:  
Title:  The savage spoke carelessly to his comrades, who were busied, after their
Title:  awkward manner, in preparing the horses for the reception of the sisters,
Title:  and moved a little to one side, whither by a cautious gesture he induced
Title:  Heyward to follow.
Title:  
Title:  Now, speak, he said; if the words are such as Magua should hear.
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard Subtil has proved himself worthy of the honorable name given to
Title:  him by his Canada fathers, commenced Heyward; I see his wisdom, and all that
Title:  he has done for us, and shall remember it when the hour to reward him
Title:  arrives. Yes! Renard has proved that he is not only a great chief in
Title:  council, but one who knows how to deceive his enemies!
Title:  
Title:  What has Renard done? coldly demanded the Indian.
Title:  
Title:  What! has he not seen that the woods were filled with outlying parties of
Title:  the enemies, and that the serpent could not steal through them without being
Title:  seen? Then, did he not lose his path to blind the eyes of the Hurons? Did he
Title:  not pretend to go back to his tribe, who had treated him ill, and driven him
Title:  from their wigwams like a dog? And when he saw what he wished to do, did we
Title:  not aid him, by making a false face, that the Hurons might think the white
Title:  man believed that his friend was his enemy? Is not all this true? And when
Title:  Le Subtil had shut the eyes and stopped the ears of his nation by his
Title:  wisdom, did they not forget that they had once done him wrong, and forced
Title:  him to flee to the Mohawks? And did they not leave him on the south side of
Title:  the river, with their prisoners, while they have gone foolishly on the
Title:  north? Does not Renard mean to turn like a fox on his footsteps, and to
Title:  carry to the rich and gray-headed Scotchman his daughters? Yes, Magua, I see
Title:  it all, and I have already been thinking how so much wisdom and honesty
Title:  should be repaid. First, the chief of William Henry will give as a great
Title:  chief should for such a service. The medal1 of Magua will no longer be on
Title:  tin, but of beaten gold; his horn will run over with powder; dollars will be
Title:  as plenty in his pouch as pebbles on the shore of Horican; and the deer will
Title:  lick his hand, for they will know it to be vain to fly from the rifle he
Title:  will carry! As for myself, I know not how to exceed the gratitude of the
Title:  Scotchman, but I - yes, I will - -
Title:  
Title:  What will the young chief, who comes from toward the sun, give? demanded the
Title:  Huron, observing that Heyward hesitated in his desire to end the enumeration
Title:  of benefits with that which might form the climax of an Indian's wishes.
Title:  
Title:  He will make the fire-water from the islands in the salt lake flow before
Title:  the wigwam of Magua, until the heart of the Indian shall be lighter than the
Title:  feathers of the humming-bird, and his breath sweeter than the wild
Title:  honeysuckle.
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard had listened gravely as Heyward slowly proceeded in this subtle
Title:  speech. When the young man mentioned the artifice he supposed the Indian to
Title:  have practised on his own nation, the countenance of the listener was veiled
Title:  in an expression of cautious gravity. At the allusion to the injury which
Title:  Duncan affected to believe had driven the Huron from his native tribe, a
Title:  gleam of such ungovernable ferocity flashed from the other's eyes, as
Title:  induced the adventurous speaker to believe he had struck the proper chord.
Title:  And by the time he reached the part where he so artfully blended the thirst
Title:  of vengeance with the desire of gain, he had, at least, obtained a command
Title:  of the deepest attention of the savage. The question put by Le Renard had
Title:  been calm, and with all the dignity of an Indian; but it was quite apparent,
Title:  by the thoughtful expression of the listener's countenance, that the answer
Title:  was most cunningly devised. The Huron mused a few moments, and then laying
Title:  his hand on the rude bandages of his wounded shoulder, he said, with some
Title:  energy:
Title:  
Title:  Do friends make such marks?
Title:  
Title:  Would La Longue Carbine cut one so slight on an enemy?
Title:  
Title:  Do the Delawares crawl upon those they love like snakes, twisting themselves
Title:  to strike?
Title:  
Title:  Would Le Gros Serpent have been heard by the ears of one he wished to be
Title:  deaf?
Title:  
Title:  Does the white chief burn his powder in the faces of his brothers?
Title:  
Title:  Does he ever miss his aim, when seriously bent to kill? returned Duncan,
Title:  smiling with well acted sincerity.
Title:  
Title:  Another long and deliberate pause succeeded these sententious questions and
Title:  ready replies. Duncan saw that the Indian hesitated. In order to complete
Title:  his victory, he was in the act of recommencing the enumeration of the
Title:  rewards, when Magua made an expressive gesture and said:
Title:  
Title:  Enough; Le Renard is a wise chief, and what he does will be seen. Go, and
Title:  keep the mouth shut. When Magua speaks, it will be the time to answer.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, perceiving that the eyes of his companion were warily fastened on
Title:  the rest of the band, fell back immediately, in order to avoid the
Title:  appearance of any suspicious confederacy with their leader. Magua approached
Title:  the horses, and affected to be well pleased with the diligence and ingenuity
Title:  of his comrades. He then signed to Heyward to assist the sisters into the
Title:  saddles, for he seldom deigned to use the English tongue, unless urged by
Title:  some motive of more than usual moment.
Title:  
Title:  There was no longer any plausible pretext for delay; and Duncan was obliged,
Title:  however reluctantly, to comply. As he performed this office, he whispered
Title:  his reviving hopes in the ears of the trembling females, who, through dread
Title:  of encountering the savage countenances of their captors, seldom raised
Title:  their eyes from the ground. The mare of David had been taken with the
Title:  followers of the large chief; in consequence, its owner, as well as Duncan,
Title:  was compelled to journey on foot. The latter did not, however, so much
Title:  regret this circumstance, as it might enable him to retard the speed of the
Title:  party; for he still turned his longing looks in the direction of Fort
Title:  Edward, in the vain expectation of catching some sound from that quarter of
Title:  the forest, which might denote the approach of succor. When all were
Title:  prepared, Magua made the signal to proceed, advancing in front to lead the
Title:  party in person. Next followed David, who was gradually coming to a true
Title:  sense of his condition, as the effects of the wound became less and less
Title:  apparent. The sisters rode in his rear, with Heyward at their side, while
Title:  the Indians flanked the party, and brought up the close of the march, with a
Title:  caution that seemed never to tire.
Title:  
Title:  In this manner they proceeded in uninterrupted silence, except when Heyward
Title:  addressed some solitary word of comfort to the females, or David gave vent
Title:  to the moanings of his spirit, in piteous exclamations, which he intended
Title:  should express the humility of resignation. Their direction lay toward the
Title:  south, and in a course nearly opposite to the road to William Henry.
Title:  Notwithstanding this apparent adherence in Magua to the original
Title:  determination of his conquerors, Hyeward could not believe his tempting bait
Title:  was so soon forgotten; and he knew the windings of an Indian's path too well
Title:  to suppose that its apparent course led directly to its object, when
Title:  artifice was at all necessary. Mile after mile was, however, passed through
Title:  the boundless woods, in this painful manner, without any prospect of a
Title:  termination to their journey. Heyward watched the sun, as he darted his
Title:  meridian rays through the branches of the trees, and pined for the moment
Title:  when the policy of Magua should change their route to one more favorable to
Title:  his hopes. Sometimes he fancied the wary savage, despairing of passing the
Title:  army of Montcalm in safety, was holding his way toward a well-known border
Title:  settlement, where a distinguished officer of the crown, and a favored friend
Title:  of the Six Nations, held his large possessions, as well as his usual
Title:  residence. To be delivered into the hands of Sir William Johnson was far
Title:  preferable to being led into the wilds of Canada; but in order to effect
Title:  even the former, it would be necessary to traverse the forest for many weary
Title:  leagues, each step of which was carrying him further from the scene of the
Title:  war, and, consequently, from the post, not only of honor, but of duty.
Title:  
Title:  Cora alone remembered the parting injunctions of the scout, and whenever an
Title:  opportunity offered, she stretched forth her arm to bend aside the twigs
Title:  that met her hands. But the vigilance of the Indians rendered this act of
Title:  precaution both difficult and dangerous. She was often defeated in her
Title:  purpose, by encountering their watchful eyes, when it became necessary to
Title:  feign an alarm she did not feel, and occupy the limb by some gesture of
Title:  feminine apprehension. Once, and once only, was she completely successful;
Title:  when she broke down the bough of a large sumach, and by a sudden thought,
Title:  let her glove fall at the same instant. This sign, intended for those that
Title:  might follow, was observed by one of her conductors, who restored the glove,
Title:  broke the remaining branches of the bush in such a manner that it appeared
Title:  to proceed from the struggling of some beast in its branches, and then laid
Title:  his hand on his tomahawk, with a look so significant, that it put an
Title:  effectual end to these stolen memorials of their passage.
Title:  
Title:  As there were horses, to leave the prints of their footsteps, in both bands
Title:  of the Indians, this interruption cut off any probable hopes of assistance
Title:  being conveyed through the means of their trail.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward would have ventured a remonstrance had there been anything
Title:  encouraging in the gloomy reserve of Magua. But the savage, during all this
Title:  time, seldom turned to look at his followers, and never spoke. With the sun
Title:  for his only guide, or aided by such blind marks as are only known to the
Title:  sagacity of a native, he held his way along the barrens of pine, through
Title:  occasional little fertile vales, across brooks and rivulets, and over
Title:  undulating hills, with the accuracy of instinct, and nearly with the
Title:  directness of a bird. He never seemed to hesitate. Whether the path was
Title:  hardly distinguishable, whether it disappeared, or whether it lay beaten and
Title:  plain before him, made no sensible difference in his speed or certainty. It
Title:  seemed as if fatigue could not affect him. Whenever the eyes of the wearied
Title:  travelers rose from the decayed leaves over which they trod, his dark form
Title:  was to be seen glancing among the stems of the trees in front, his head
Title:  immovably fastened in a forward position, with the light plume on his crest
Title:  fluttering in a current of air, made solely by the swiftness of his own
Title:  motion.
Title:  
Title:  But all this diligence and speed were not without an object. After crossing
Title:  a low vale, through which a gushing brook meandered, he suddenly ascended a
Title:  hill, so steep and difficult of ascent, that the sisters were compelled to
Title:  alight in order to follow. When the summit was gained, they found themselves
Title:  on a level spot, but thinly covered with trees, under one of which Magua had
Title:  thrown his dark form, as if willing and ready to seek that rest which was so
Title:  much needed by the whole party.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 It has long been a practice with the whites to conciliate the important
Title:  men of the Indians by presenting medals, which are worn in the place of
Title:  their own rude ornaments. Those given by the English generally bear the
Title:  impression of the reigning king, and those given by the Americans that of
Title:  the president.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 11
Title:  
Title:       Shylock: Cursed be my tribe If I forgive him.
Title:  
Title:                                                      MERCHANT OF VENICE
Title:  
Title:  The Indian had selected for this desirable purpose one of those steep,
Title:  pyramidal hills, which bear a strong resemblance to artificial mounds, and
Title:  which so frequently occur in the valleys of America. The one in question was
Title:  high and precipitous; its top flattened, as usual; but with one of its sides
Title:  more than oridinarily irregular. It possessed no other apparent advantage
Title:  for a resting place, than in its elevation and form, which might render
Title:  defense easy, and surprise nearly impossible. As Heyward, however, no longer
Title:  expected that rescue which time and distance now rendered so improbable, he
Title:  regarded these little peculiarities with an eye devoid of interest, devoting
Title:  himself entirely to the comfort and condolence of his feebler companions.
Title:  The Narragansetts were suffered to browse on the branches of the trees and
Title:  shrubs that were thinly scattered over the summit of the hill, while the
Title:  remains of their provisions were spread under the shade of a beech, that
Title:  stretched its horizontal limbs like a canopy above them.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding the swiftness of their flight, one of the Indians had found
Title:  an opportunity to strike a straggling fawn with an arrow, and had borne the
Title:  more preferable fragments of the victim, patiently on his shoulders, to the
Title:  stopping place. Without any aid from the science of cookery, he was
Title:  immediately employed, in common with his fellows, in gorging himself with
Title:  this digestible sustenance. Magua alone sat apart, without participating in
Title:  the revolting meal, and apparently buried in the deepest thought.
Title:  
Title:  This abstinence, so remarkable in an Indian, when he possessed the means of
Title:  satisfying hunger, at length attracted the notice of Heyward. The young man
Title:  willingly believed that the Huron deliberated on the most eligible manner of
Title:  eluding the vigilance of his associates. With a view to assist his plans by
Title:  any suggestion of his own, and to strengthen the temptation, he left the
Title:  beech, and straggled, as if without an object, to the spot where Le Renard
Title:  was seated.
Title:  
Title:  Has not Magua kept the sun in his face long enough to escape all danger from
Title:  the Canadians? he asked, as though no longer doubtful of the good
Title:  intelligence established between them; and will not the chief of William
Title:  Henry be better pleased to see his daughters before another night may have
Title:  hardened his heart to their loss, to make him less liberal in his reward?
Title:  
Title:  Do the pale faces love their children less in the morning than at night?
Title:  asked the Indian, coldly.
Title:  
Title:  By no means, returned Heyward, anxious to recall his error, if he had made
Title:  one; the white man may, and does often, forget the burial place of his
Title:  fathers; he sometimes ceases to remember those he should love, and has
Title:  promised to cherish; but the affection of a parent for his child is never
Title:  permitted to die.
Title:  
Title:  And is the heart of the white-headed chief soft, and will he think of the
Title:  babes that his squaws have given him? He is hard on his warriors and his
Title:  eyes are made of stone?
Title:  
Title:  He is severe to the idle and wicked, but to the sober and deserving he is a
Title:  leader, both just and humane. I have known many fond and tender parents, but
Title:  never have I seen a man whose heart was softer toward his child. You have
Title:  seen the gray-head in front of his warriors, Magua; but I have seen his eyes
Title:  swimming in water, when he spoke of those children who are now in your
Title:  power!
Title:  
Title:  Heyward paused, for he knew not how to construe the remarkable expression
Title:  that gleamed across the swarthy features of the attentive Indian. At first
Title:  it seemed as if the remembrance of the promised reward grew vivid in his
Title:  mind, while he listened to the sources of parental feeling which were to
Title:  assure its possession; but, as Duncan proceeded, the expression of joy
Title:  became so fiercely malignant that it was impossible not to apprehend it
Title:  proceeded from some passion more sinister than avarice.
Title:  
Title:  Go, said the Huron, suppressing the alarming exhibition in an instant, in a
Title:  death-like calmness of countenance; go to the dark-haired daughter, and say,
Title:  Magua waits to speak. The father will remember what the child promises.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, who interpreted this speech to express a wish for some additional
Title:  pledge that the promised gifts should not be withheld, slowly and
Title:  reluctantly repaired to the place where the sisters were now resting from
Title:  their fatigue, to communicate its purport to Cora.
Title:  
Title:  You understand the nature of an Indian's wishes, he concluded, as he led her
Title:  toward the place where she was expected, and must be prodigal of your offers
Title:  of powder and blankets. Ardent spirits are, however, the most prized by such
Title:  as he; nor would it be amiss to add some boon from your own hand, with that
Title:  grace you so well know how to practise. Remember, Cora, that on your
Title:  presence of mind and ingenuity, even your life, as well as that of Alice,
Title:  may in some measure depend.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, and yours!
Title:  
Title:  Mine is of little moment; it is already sold to my king, and is a prize to
Title:  be seized by any enemy who may possess the power. I have no father to expect
Title:  me, and but few friends to lament a fate which I have courted with the
Title:  insatiable longings of youth after distinction. But hush! we approach the
Title:  Indian. Magua, the lady with whom you wish to speak, is here.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian rose slowly from his seat, and stood for near a minute silent and
Title:  motionless. He then signed with his hand for Heyward to retire, saying,
Title:  coldly:
Title:  
Title:  When the Huron talks to the women, his tribe shut their ears.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, still lingering, as if refusing to comply, Coras said, with a calm
Title:  smile:
Title:  
Title:  You hear, Heyward, and delicacy at least should urge you to retire. Go to
Title:  Alice, and comfort her with our reviving prospects.
Title:  
Title:  She waited until he had departed, and then turning to the native, with the
Title:  dignity of her sex in her voice and manner, she added: What would Le Renard
Title:  say to the daughter of Munro?
Title:  
Title:  Listen, said the Indian, laying his hand firmly upon her arm, as if willing
Title:  to draw her utmost attention to his words; a movement that Cora as firmly
Title:  but quietly repulsed, by extricating the limb from his grasp: Magua was born
Title:  a chief and a warrior among the red Hurons of the lakes; he saw the suns of
Title:  twenty summers make the snows of twenty winters run off in the streams
Title:  before he saw a pale face; and he was happy! Then his Canada fathers came
Title:  into the woods, and taught him to drink the fire-water, and he became a
Title:  rascal. The Hurons drove him from the graves of his fathers, as they would
Title:  chase the hunted buffalo. He ran down the shores of the lakes, and followed
Title:  their outlet to the city of cannon. There he hunted and fished, till the
Title:  people chased him again through the woods into the arms of his enemies. The
Title:  chief, who was born a Huron, was at last a warrior among the Mohawks!
Title:  
Title:  Something like this I had heard before, said Cora, observing that he paused
Title:  to suppress those passions which began to burn with too bright a flame, as
Title:  he recalled the recollection of his supposed injuries.
Title:  
Title:  Was it the fault of Le Renard that his head was not made of rock? Who gave
Title:  him the fire-water? who made him a villain? 'Twas the pale faces, the people
Title:  of your own color.
Title:  
Title:  And am I answerable that thoughtless and unprincipled men exist, whose
Title:  shades of countenance may resemble mine? Cora calmly demanded of the excited
Title:  savage.
Title:  
Title:  No; Magua is a man, and not a fool; such as you never open their lips to the
Title:  burning stream: the Great Spirit has given you wisdom!
Title:  
Title:  What, then, have I do to, or say, in the matter of your misfortunes, not to
Title:  say of your errors?
Title:  
Title:  Listen, repeated the Indian, resuming his earnest attitude; when his English
Title:  and French fathers dug up the hatchet, Le Renard struck the war-post of the
Title:  Mohawks, and went out against his own nation. The pale faces have driven the
Title:  red-skins from their hunting grounds, and now when they fight, a white man
Title:  leads the way. The old chief at Horican, your father, was the great captain
Title:  of our war-party. He said to the Mohawks do this, and do that, and he was
Title:  minded. He made a law, that if an Indian swallowed the fire-water, and came
Title:  into the cloth wigwams of his warriors, it should not be forgotten. Magua
Title:  foolishly opened his mouth, and the hot liquor led him into the cabin of
Title:  Munro. What did the gray-head? let his daughter say.
Title:  
Title:  He forgot not his words, and did justice, by punishing the offender, said
Title:  the undaunted daughter.
Title:  
Title:  Justice! repeated the Indian, casting an oblique glance of the most
Title:  ferocious expression at her unyielding countenance; is it justice to make
Title:  evil and then punish for it? Magua was not himself; it was the fire-water
Title:  that spoke and acted for him! but Munro did believe it. The Huron chief was
Title:  tied up before all the pale-faced warriors, and whipped like a dog.
Title:  
Title:  Cora remained silent, for she knew not how to palliate this imprudent
Title:  severity on the part of her father in a manner to suit the comprehension of
Title:  an Indian.
Title:  
Title:  See! continued Magua, tearing aside the slight calico that very imperfectly
Title:  concealed his painted breast; here are scars given by knives and bullets -
Title:  of these a warrior may boast before his nation; but the gray-head has left
Title:  marks on the back of the Huron chief that he must hide like a squaw, under
Title:  this painted cloth of the whites.
Title:  
Title:  I had thought, resumed Cora, that an Indian warrior was patient, and that
Title:  his spirit felt not and knew not the pain his body suffered.
Title:  
Title:  When the Chippewas tied Magua to the stake, and cut this gash, said the
Title:  other, laying his finger on a deep scar, the Huron laughed in their faces,
Title:  and told them, Women struck so light! His spirit was then in the clouds! But
Title:  when he felt the blows of Munro, his spirit lay under the birch. The spirit
Title:  of a Huron is never drunk; it remembers forever!
Title:  
Title:  But it may be appeased. If my father has done you this injustice, show him
Title:  how an Indian can forgive an injury, and take back his daughters. You have
Title:  heard from Major Heyward - -
Title:  
Title:  Magua shook his head, forbidding the repetition of offers he so much
Title:  despised.
Title:  
Title:  What would you have? continued Cora, after a most painful pause, while the
Title:  conviction forced itself on her mind that the too sanguine and generous
Title:  Duncan had been cruelly deceived by the cunning of the savage.
Title:  
Title:  What a Huron loves - good for good; bad for bad!
Title:  
Title:  You would, then, revenge the injury inflicted by Munro on his helpless
Title:  daughters. Would it not be more like a man to go before his face, and take
Title:  the satisfaction of a warrior?
Title:  
Title:  The arms of the pale faces are long, and their knives sharp! returned the
Title:  savage, with a malignant laugh: why should Le Renard go among the muskets of
Title:  his warriors, when he holds the spirit of the gray-head in his hand?
Title:  
Title:  Name your intention, Magua, said Cora, struggling with herself to speak with
Title:  steady calmness. Is it to lead us prisoners to the woods, or do you
Title:  contemplate even some greater evil? Is there no reward, no means of
Title:  palliating the injury, and of softening your heart? At least, release my
Title:  gentle sister, and pour out all your malice on me. Purchase wealth by her
Title:  safety and satisfy your revenge with a single victim. The loss of both his
Title:  daughters might bring the aged man to his grave, and where would then be the
Title:  satisfaction of Le Renard?
Title:  
Title:  Listen, said the Indian again. The light eyes can go back to the Horican,
Title:  and tell the old chief what has been done, if the dark-haired woman will
Title:  swear by the Great Spirit of her fathers to tell no lie.
Title:  
Title:  What must I promise? demanded Cora, still maintaining a secret ascendency
Title:  over the fierce native by the collected and feminine dignity of her
Title:  presence.
Title:  
Title:  When Magua left his people his wife was given to another chief; he has now
Title:  made friends with the Hurons, and will go back to the graves of his tribe,
Title:  on the shores of the great lake. Let the daughter of the English chief
Title:  follow, and live in his wigwam forever.
Title:  
Title:  However revolting a proposal of such a character might prove to Cora, she
Title:  retained, notwithstanding her powerful disgust, sufficient self-command to
Title:  reply, without betraying the weakness.
Title:  
Title:  And what pleasure would Magua find in sharing his cabin with a wife he did
Title:  not love; one who would be of a nation and color different from his own? It
Title:  would be better to take the gold of Munro, and buy the heart of some Huron
Title:  maid with his gifts.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian made no reply for near a minute, but bent his fierce looks on the
Title:  countenance of Cora, in such wavering glances, that her eyes sank with
Title:  shame, under an impression that for the first time they had encountered an
Title:  expression that no chaste female might endure. While she was shrinking
Title:  within herself, in dread of having her ears wounded by some proposal still
Title:  more shocking than the last, the voice of Magua answered, in its tones of
Title:  deepest malignancy:
Title:  
Title:  When the blows scorched the back of the Huron, he would know where to find a
Title:  woman to feel the smart. The daughter of Munro would draw his water, hoe his
Title:  corn, and cook his venison. The body of the gray-head would sleep among his
Title:  cannon, but his heart would lie within reach of the knife of Le Subtil.
Title:  
Title:  Monster! well dost thou deserve thy treacherous name, cried Cora, in an
Title:  ungovernable burst of filial indignation. None but a fiend could meditate
Title:  such a vengeance. But thou overratest thy power! You shall find it is, in
Title:  truth, the heart of Munro you hold, and that it will defy your utmost
Title:  malice!
Title:  
Title:  The Indian answered this bold defiance by a ghastly smile, that showed an
Title:  unaltered purpose, while he motioned her away, as if to close the conference
Title:  forever. Cora, already regretting her precipitation, was obliged to comply,
Title:  for Magua instantly left the spot, and approached his gluttonous comrades.
Title:  Heyward flew to the side of the agitated female, and demanded the result of
Title:  a dialogue that he had watched at a distance with so much interest. But,
Title:  unwilling to alarm the fears of Alice, she evaded a direct reply, betraying
Title:  only by her anxious looks fastened on the slightest movements of her
Title:  captors. To the reiterated and earnest questions of her sister concerning
Title:  their probable destination, she made no other answer than by pointing toward
Title:  the dark group, with an agitation she could not control, and murmuring as
Title:  she folded Alice to her bosom.
Title:  
Title:  There, there; read our fortunes in their faces; we shall see; we shall see!
Title:  
Title:  The action, and the choked utterance of Cora, spoke more impressively than
Title:  any words, and quickly drew the attention of her companions on that spot
Title:  where her own was riveted with an intenseness that nothing but the
Title:  importance of the stake could create.
Title:  
Title:  When Magua reached the cluster of lolling savages, who, gorged with their
Title:  disgusting meal, lay stretched on the earth in brutal indulgence, he
Title:  commenced speaking with the dignity of an Indian chief. The first syllables
Title:  he uttered had the effect to cause his listeners to raise themselves in
Title:  attitudes of respectful attention. As the Huron used his native language,
Title:  the prisoners, notwithstanding the caution of the natives had kept them
Title:  within the swing of their tomahawks, could only conjecture the substance of
Title:  his harangue from the nature of those significant gestures with which an
Title:  Indian always illustrates his eloquence.
Title:  
Title:  At first, the language, as well as the action of Magua, appeared calm and
Title:  deliberative. When he had succeeded in sufficiently awakening the attention
Title:  of his comrades, Heyward fancied, by his pointing so frequently toward the
Title:  direction of the great lakes, that he spoke of the land of their fathers,
Title:  and of their distant tribe. Frequent indications of applause escaped the
Title:  listeners, who, as they uttered the expressive Hugh! looked at each other in
Title:  commendation of the speaker. Le Renard was too skillful to neglect his
Title:  advantage. He now spoke of the long and painful route by which they had left
Title:  those spacious grounds and happy villages, to come and battle against the
Title:  enemies of their Canadian fathers. He enumerated the warriors of the party;
Title:  their several merits; their frequent services to the nation; their wounds,
Title:  and the number of the scalps they had taken. Whenever he alluded to any
Title:  present (and the subtle Indian neglected none), the dark countenance of the
Title:  flattered individual gleamed with exultation, nor did he even hesitate to
Title:  assert the truth of the words, by gestures of applause and confirmation.
Title:  Then the voice of the speaker fell, and lost the loud, animated tones of
Title:  triumph with which he had enumerated their deeds of success and victory. He
Title:  described the cataract of Glenn's; the impregnable position of its rocky
Title:  island, with its caverns and its numerous rapids and whirlpools; he named
Title:  the name of La Longue Carabine, and paused until the forest beneath them had
Title:  sent up the last echo of a loud and long yell, with which the hated
Title:  appellation was received. He pointed toward the youthful military captive,
Title:  and described the death of a favorite warrior, who had been precipitated
Title:  into the deep ravine by his hand. He not only mentioned the fate of him who,
Title:  hanging between heaven and earth, had presented such a spectacle of horror
Title:  to the whole band, but he acted anew the terrors of his situation, his
Title:  resolution and his death, on the branches of a sapling; and, finally, he
Title:  rapidly recounted the manner in which each of their friends had fallen,
Title:  never failing to touch upon their courage, and their most acknowledged
Title:  virtues. When this recital of events was ended, his voice once more changed,
Title:  and became plaintive and even musical, in its low guttural sounds. He now
Title:  spoke of the wives and children of the slain; their destitution; their
Title:  misery, both physical and moral; their distance; and, at last, of their
Title:  unavenged wrongs. Then suddenly lifting his voice to a pitch of terrific
Title:  energy, he concluded by demanding:
Title:  
Title:  Are the Hurons dogs to bear this? Who shall say to the wife of Menowgua that
Title:  the fishes have his scalp, and that his nation have not taken revenge! Who
Title:  will dare meet the mother of Wassawattimie, that scornful woman, with his
Title:  hands clean! What shall be said to the old men when they ask us for scalps,
Title:  and we have not a hair from a white head to give them! The women will point
Title:  their fingers at us. There is a dark spot on the names of the Hurons, and it
Title:  must be hid in blood! His voice was no longer audible in the burst of rage
Title:  which now broke into the air, as if the wood, instead of containing so small
Title:  a band, was filled with the nation. During the foregoing address the
Title:  progress of the speaker was too plainly read by those most interested in his
Title:  success through the medium of the countenances of the men he addressed. They
Title:  had answered his melancholy and mourning by sympathy and sorrow; his
Title:  assertions, by gestures of confirmation; and his boasting, with the
Title:  exultation of savages. When he spoke of courage, their looks were firm and
Title:  responsive; when he alluded to their injuries, their eyes kindled with fury;
Title:  when he mentioned the taunts of the women, they dropped their heads in
Title:  shame; but when he pointed out their means of vengeance, he struck a chord
Title:  which never failed to thrill in the breast of an Indian. With the first
Title:  intimation that it was within their reach, the whole band sprang upon their
Title:  feet as one man; giving utterance to their rage in the most frantic cries,
Title:  they rushed upon their prisoners in a body with drawn knives and uplifted
Title:  tomahawks. Heyward threw himself between the sisters and the foremost, whom
Title:  he grappled with a desperate strength that for a moment checked his
Title:  violence. This unexpected resistance gave Magua time to interpose, and with
Title:  rapid enunciation and animated gesture, he drew the attention of the band
Title:  again to himself. In that language he knew so well how to assume, he
Title:  diverted his comrades from their instant purpose, and invited them to
Title:  prolong the misery of their victims. His proposal was received with
Title:  acclamations, and executed with the swiftness of thought.
Title:  
Title:  Two powerful warriors cast themselves on Heyward, while another was occupied
Title:  in securing the less active singing-master. Neither of the captives,
Title:  however, submitted without a desperate, though fruitless, struggle. Even
Title:  David hurled his assailant to the earth; nor was Heyward secured until the
Title:  victory over his companion enabled the Indians to direct their united force
Title:  to that object. He was then bound and fastened to the body of the sapling,
Title:  on whose branches Magua had acted the pantomime of the falling Huron. When
Title:  the young soldier regained his recollection, he had the painful certainty
Title:  before his eyes that a common fate was intended for the whole party. On his
Title:  right was Cora in a durance similar to his own, pale and agitated, but with
Title:  an eye whose steady look still read the proceedings of their enemies. On his
Title:  left, the withes which bound her to a pine, performed that office for Alice
Title:  which her trembling limbs refused, and alone kept her fragile form from
Title:  sinking. Her hands were clasped before her in prayer, but instead of looking
Title:  upward toward that power which alone could rescue them, her unconscious
Title:  looks wandered to the countenance of Duncan with infantile dependency. David
Title:  had contended, and the novelty of the circumstance held him silent, in
Title:  deliberation on the propriety of the unusual occurrence.
Title:  
Title:  The vengeance of the Hurons had now taken a new direction, and they prepared
Title:  to execute it with that barbarous ingenuity with which they were
Title:  familiarized by the practise of centuries. Some sought knots, to raise the
Title:  blazing pile; one was riving the splinters of pine, in order to pierce the
Title:  flesh of their captives with the burning fragments; and others bent the tops
Title:  of two saplings to the earth, in order to suspend Heyward by the arms
Title:  between the recoiling branches. But the vengeance of Magua sought a deeper
Title:  and more malignant enjoyment.
Title:  
Title:  While the less refined monsters of the band prepared, before the eyes of
Title:  those who were to suffer, these well-known and vulgar means of torture, he
Title:  approached Cora, and pointed out, with the most malign expression of
Title:  countenance, the speedy fate that awaited her:
Title:  
Title:  Ha! he added, what says the daughter of Munro? Her head is too good to find
Title:  a pillow in the wigwam of Le Renard; will she like it better when it rolls
Title:  about this hill a plaything for the wolves? Her bosom cannot nurse the
Title:  children of a Huron; she will see it spit upon by Indians!
Title:  
Title:  What means the monster! demanded the astonished Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Nothing! was the firm reply. He is a savage, a barbarous and ignorant
Title:  savage, and knows not what he does. Let us find leisure, with our dying
Title:  breath, to ask for him penitence and pardon.
Title:  
Title:  Pardon! echoed the fierce Huron, mistaking in his anger, the meaning of her
Title:  words; the memory of an Indian is no longer than the arm of the pale faces;
Title:  his mercy shorter than their justice! Say; shall I send the yellow hair to
Title:  her father, and will you follow Magua to the great lakes, to carry his
Title:  water, and feed him with corn?
Title:  
Title:  Cora beckoned him away, with an emotion of disgust she could not control.
Title:  
Title:  Leave me, she said, with a solemnity that for a moment checked the barbarity
Title:  of the Indian; you mingle bitterness in my prayers; you stand between me and
Title:  my God!
Title:  
Title:  The slight impression produced on the savage was, however, soon forgotten,
Title:  and he continued pointing, with taunting irony, toward Alice.
Title:  
Title:  Look! the child weeps! She is too young to die! Send her to Munro, to comb
Title:  his gray hairs, and keep life in the heart of the old man.
Title:  
Title:  Cora could not resist the desire to look upon her youthful sister, in whose
Title:  eyes she met an imploring glance, that betrayed the longings of nature.
Title:  
Title:  What says he, dearest Cora? asked the trembling voice of Alice. Did he speak
Title:  of sending me to our father?
Title:  
Title:  For many moments the elder sister looked upon the younger, with a
Title:  countenance that wavered with powerful and contending emotions. At length
Title:  she spoke, though her tones had lost their rich and calm fullness, in an
Title:  expression of tenderness that seemed maternal.
Title:  
Title:  Alice, she said, the Huron offers us both life, nay, more than both; he
Title:  offers to restore Duncan, our invaluable Duncan, as well as you, to our
Title:  friends - to our father - to our heart-stricken, childless father, if I will
Title:  bow down this rebellious, stubborn pride of mine, and consent - -
Title:  
Title:  Her voice became choked, and clasping her hands, she looked upward, as if
Title:  seeking, in her agony, intelligence from a wisdom that was infinite.
Title:  
Title:  Say on, cried Alice; to what, dearest Cora? Oh! that the proffer were made
Title:  to me! to save you, to cheer our aged father, to restore Duncan, how
Title:  cheerfully could I die!
Title:  
Title:  Die! repeated Cora, with a calmer and firmer voice that were easy! Perhaps
Title:  the alternative may not be less so. He would have me, she continued, her
Title:  accents sinking under a deep consciousness of the degradation of the
Title:  proposal, follow him to the wilderness; go to the habitations of the Hurons;
Title:  to remain there; in short, to become his wife! Speak, then, Alice; child of
Title:  my affections! sister of my love! And you, too, Major Heyward, aid my weak
Title:  reason with your counsel. Is life to be purchased by such a sacrifice? Will
Title:  you, Alice, receive it at my hands at such a price? And you, Duncan, guide
Title:  me; control me between you; for I am wholly yours!
Title:  
Title:  Would I! echoed the indignant and astonished youth. Cora! Cora! you jest
Title:  with our misery! Name not the horrid alternative again; the thought itself
Title:  is worse than a thousand deaths.
Title:  
Title:  That such would be your answer, I well knew! exclaimed Cora, her cheeks
Title:  flushing, and her dark eyes once more sparkling with the lingering emotions
Title:  of a woman. What says my Alice? for her will I submit without another
Title:  murmur.
Title:  
Title:  Although both Heyward and Cora listened with painful suspense and the
Title:  deepest attention, no sounds were heard in reply. It appeared as if the
Title:  delicate and sensitive form of Alice would shrink into itself, as she
Title:  listened to this proposal. Her arms had fallen lengthwise before her, the
Title:  fingers moving in slight convulsions; her head dropped upon her bosom, and
Title:  her whole person seemed suspended against the tree, looking like some
Title:  beautiful emblem of the wounded delicacy of her sex, devoid of animation and
Title:  yet keenly conscious. In a few moments, however, her head began to move
Title:  slowly, in a sign of deep, unconquerable disapprobation.
Title:  
Title:  No, no, no; better that we die as we have lived, together!
Title:  
Title:  Then die! shouted Magua, hurling his tomahawk with violence at the
Title:  unresisting speaker, and gnashing his teeth with a rage that could no longer
Title:  be bridled at this sudden exhibition of firmness in the one he believed the
Title:  weakest of the party. The axe cleaved the air in front of Heyward, and
Title:  cutting some of the flowing ringlets of Alice, quivered in the tree above
Title:  her head. The sight maddened Duncan to desperation. Collecting all his
Title:  energies in one effort he snapped the twigs which bound him and rushed upon
Title:  another savage, who was preparing, with loud yells and a more deliberate
Title:  aim, to repeat the blow. They encountered, grappled, and fell to the earth
Title:  together. The naked body of his antagonist afforded Heyward no means of
Title:  holding his adversary, who glided from his grasp, and rose again with one
Title:  knee on his chest, pressing him down with the weight of a giant. Duncan
Title:  already saw the knife gleaming in the air, when a whistling sound swept past
Title:  him, and was rather accompanied than followed by the sharp crack of a rifle.
Title:  He felt his breast relieved from the load it had endured; he saw the savage
Title:  expression of his adversary's countenance change to a look of vacant
Title:  wildness, when the Indian fell dead on the faded leaves by his side.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 12
Title:  
Title:       Clown: I am gone, sire,
Title:       And anon, sire,
Title:       I'll be with you again.
Title:  
Title:                                                           TWELFTH NIGHT
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons stood aghast at this sudden visitation of death on one of their
Title:  band. But as they regarded the fatal accuracy of an aim which had dared to
Title:  immolate an enemy at so much hazard to a friend, the name of La Longue
Title:  Carabine burst simultaneously from every lip, and was succeeded by a wild
Title:  and a sort of plaintive howl. The cry was answered by a loud shout from a
Title:  little thicket, where the incautious party had piled their arms; and at the
Title:  next moment, Hawkeye, too eager to load the rifle he had regained, was seen
Title:  advancing upon them, brandishing the clubbed weapon, and cutting the air
Title:  with wide and powerful sweeps. Bold and rapid as was the progress of the
Title:  scout, it was exceeded by that of a light and vigorous form which, bounding
Title:  past him, leaped, with incredible activity and daring, into the very center
Title:  of the Hurons, where it stood, whirling a tomahawk, and flourishing a
Title:  glittering knife, with fearful menaces, in front of Cora. Quicker than the
Title:  thoughts could follow those unexpected and audacious movements, an image,
Title:  armed in the emblematic panoply of death, glided before their eyes, and
Title:  assumed a threatening attitude at the other's side. The savage tormentors
Title:  recoiled before these warlike intruders, and uttered, as they appeared in
Title:  such quick succession, the often repeated and peculiar exclamations of
Title:  surprise, followed by the well-known and dreaded appellations of:
Title:  
Title:  Le Cerf Agile! Le Gros Serpent!
Title:  
Title:  But the wary and vigilant leader of the Hurons was not so easily
Title:  disconcerted. Casting his keen eyes around the little plain, he comprehended
Title:  the nature of the assault at a glance, and encouraging his followers by his
Title:  voice as well as by his example, he unsheathed his long and dangerous knife,
Title:  and rushed with a loud whoop upon the expected Chingachgook. It was the
Title:  signal for a general combat. Neither party had firearms, and the contest was
Title:  to be decided in the deadliest manner, hand to hand, with weapons of
Title:  offense, and none of defense.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas answered the whoop, and leaping on an enemy, with a single,
Title:  well-directed blow of his tomahawk, cleft him to the brain. Heyward tore the
Title:  weapon of Magua from the sapling, and rushed eagerly toward the fray. As the
Title:  combatants were now equal in number, each singled an opponent from the
Title:  adverse band. The rush and blows passed with the fury of a whirlwind, and
Title:  the swiftness of lightning. Hawkeye soon got another enemy within reach of
Title:  his arm, and with one sweep of his formidable weapon he beat down the slight
Title:  and inartificial defenses of his antagonist, crushing him to the earth with
Title:  the blow. Heyward ventured to hurl the tomahawk he had seized, too ardent to
Title:  await the moment of closing. It struck the Indian he had selected on the
Title:  forehead, and checked for an instant his onward rush. Encouraged by this
Title:  slight advantage, the impetuous young man continued his onset, and sprang
Title:  upon his enemy with naked hands. A single instant was enough to assure him
Title:  of the rashness of the measure, for he immediately found himself fully
Title:  engaged, with all his activity and courage, in endeavoring to ward the
Title:  desperate thrusts made with the knife of the Huron. Unable longer to foil an
Title:  enemy so alert and vigilant, he threw his arms about him, and succeeded in
Title:  pinning the limbs of the other to his side, with an iron grasp, but one that
Title:  was far too exhausting to himself to continue long. In this extremity he
Title:  heard a voice near him, shouting:
Title:  
Title:  Extarminate the varlets! no quarter to an accursed Mingo!
Title:  
Title:  At the next moment, the breech of Hawkeye's rifle fell on the naked head of
Title:  his adversary, whose muscles appeared to wither under the shock, as he sank
Title:  from the arms of Duncan, flexible and motionless.
Title:  
Title:  When Uncas had brained his first antagonist, he turned, like a hungry lion,
Title:  to seek another. The fifth and only Huron disengaged at the first onset had
Title:  paused a moment, and then seeing that all around him were employed in the
Title:  deadly strife, he had sought, with hellish vengeance, to complete the
Title:  baffled work of revenge. Raising a shout of triumph, he sprang toward the
Title:  defenseless Cora, sending his keen axe as the dreadful precursor of his
Title:  approach. The tomahawk grazed her shoulder, and cutting the withes which
Title:  bound her to the tree, left the maiden at liberty to fly. She eluded the
Title:  grasp of the savage, and reckless of her own safety, threw herself on the
Title:  bosom of Alice, striving with convulsed and ill-directed fingers, to tear
Title:  asunder the twigs which confined the person of her sister. Any other than a
Title:  monster would have relented at such an act of generous devotion to the best
Title:  and purest affection; but the breast of the Huron was a stranger to
Title:  sympathy. Seizing Cora by the rich tresses which fell in confusion about her
Title:  form, he tore her from her frantic hold, and bowed her down with brutal
Title:  violence to her knees. The savage drew the flowing curls through his hand,
Title:  and raising them on high with an outstretched arm, he passed the knife
Title:  around the exquisitely molded head of his victim, with a taunting and
Title:  exulting laugh. But he purchased this moment of fierce gratification with
Title:  the loss of the fatal opportunity. It was just then the sight caught the eye
Title:  of Uncas. Bounding from his footsteps he appeared for an instant darting
Title:  through the air and descending in a ball he fell on the chest of his enemy,
Title:  driving him many yards from the spot, headlong and prostrate. The violence
Title:  of the exertion cast the young Mohican at his side. They arose together,
Title:  fought, and bled, each in his turn. But the conflict was soon decided; the
Title:  tomahawk of Heyward and the rifle of Hawkeye descended on the skull of the
Title:  Huron, at the same moment that the knife of Uncas reached his heart.
Title:  
Title:  The battle was now entirely terminated with the exception of the protracted
Title:  struggle between Le Renard Subtil and Le Gros Serpent. Well did these
Title:  barbarous warriors prove that they deserved those significant names which
Title:  had been bestowed for deeds in former wars. When they engaged, some little
Title:  time was lost in eluding the quick and vigorous thrusts which had been aimed
Title:  at their lives. Suddenly darting on each other, they closed, and came to the
Title:  earth, twisted together like twining serpents, in pliant and subtle folds.
Title:  At the moment when the victors found themselves unoccupied, the spot where
Title:  these experienced and desperate combatants lay could only be distinguished
Title:  by a cloud of dust and leaves, which moved from the center of the little
Title:  plain toward its boundary, as if raised by the passage of a whirlwind. Urged
Title:  by the different motives of filial affection, friendship and gratitude,
Title:  Heyward and his companions rushed with one accord to the place, encircling
Title:  the little canopy of dust which hung above the warriors. In vain did Uncas
Title:  dart around the cloud, with a wish to strike his knife into the heart of his
Title:  father's foe; the threatening rifle of Hawkeye was raised and suspended in
Title:  vain, while Duncan endeavored to seize the limbs of the Huron with hands
Title:  that appeared to have lost their power. Covered as they were with dust and
Title:  blood, the swift evolutions of the combatants seemed to incorporate their
Title:  bodies into one. The death-like looking figure of the Mohican, and the dark
Title:  form of the Huron, gleamed before their eyes in such quick and confused
Title:  succession, that the friends of the former knew not where to plant the
Title:  succoring blow. It is true there were short and fleeting moments, when the
Title:  fiery eyes of Magua were seen glittering, like the fabled organs of the
Title:  basilisk through the dusty wreath by which he was enveloped, and he read by
Title:  those short and deadly glances the fate of the combat in the presence of his
Title:  enemies; ere, however, any hostile hand could descend on his devoted head,
Title:  its place was filled by the scowling visage of Chingachgook. In this manner
Title:  the scene of the combat was removed from the center of the little plain to
Title:  its verge. The Mohican now found an opportunity to make a powerful thrust
Title:  with his knife; Magua suddenly relinquished his grasp, and fell backward
Title:  without motion, and seemingly without life. His adversary leaped on his
Title:  feet, making the arches of the forest ring with the sounds of triumph.
Title:  
Title:  Well done for the Delawares! victory to the Mohicans! cried Hawkeye, once
Title:  more elevating the butt of the long and fatal rifle; a finishing blow from a
Title:  man without a cross will never tell against his honor, nor rob him of his
Title:  right to the scalp.
Title:  
Title:  But at the very moment when the dangerous weapon was in the act of
Title:  descending, the subtle Huron rolled swiftly from beneath the danger, over
Title:  the edge of the precipice, and falling on his feet, was seen leaping, with a
Title:  single bound, into the center of a thicket of low bushes, which clung along
Title:  its sides. The Delawares, who had believed their enemy dead, uttered their
Title:  exclamation of surprise, and were following with speed and clamor, like
Title:  hounds in open view of the deer, when a shrill and peculiar cry from the
Title:  scout instantly changed their purpose, and recalled them to the summit of
Title:  the hill.
Title:  
Title:  'Twas like himself! cried the inveterate forester, whose prejudices
Title:  contributed so largely to veil his natural sense of justice in all matters
Title:  which concerned the Mingoes; a lying and deceitful varlet as he is. An
Title:  honest Delaware now, being fairly vanquished, would have lain still, and
Title:  been knocked on the head, but these knavish Maquas cling to life like so
Title:  many cats-o'-the-mountain. Let him go - let him go; 'tis but one man, and he
Title:  without rifle or bow, many a long mile from his French commerades; and like
Title:  a rattler that lost his fangs, he can do no further mischief, until such
Title:  time as he, and we too, may leave the prints of our moccasins over a long
Title:  reach of sandy plain. See, Uncas, he added, in Delaware, your father if
Title:  flaying the scalps already. It may be well to go round and feel the
Title:  vagabonds that are left, or we may have another of them loping through the
Title:  woods, and screeching like a jay that has been winged.
Title:  
Title:  So saying the honest but implacable scout made the circuit of the dead, into
Title:  whose senseless bosoms he thrust his long knife, with as much coolness as
Title:  though they had been so many brute carcasses. He had, however, been
Title:  anticipated by the elder Mohican, who had already torn the emblems of
Title:  victory from the unresisting heads of the slain.
Title:  
Title:  But Uncas, denying his habits, we had almost said his nature, flew with
Title:  instinctive delicacy, accompanied by Heyward, to the assistance of the
Title:  females, and quickly releasing Alice, placed her in the arms of Cora. We
Title:  shall not attempt to describe the gratitude to the Almighty Disposer of
Title:  Events which glowed in the bosoms of the sisters, who were thus unexpectedly
Title:  restored to life and to each other. Their thanksgivings were deep and
Title:  silent; the offerings of their gentle spirits burning brightest and purest
Title:  on the secret altars of their hearts; and their renovated and more earthly
Title:  feelings exhibiting themselves in long and fervent though speechless
Title:  caresses. As Alice rose from her knees, where she had sunk by the side of
Title:  Cora, she threw herself on the bosom of the latter, and sobbed aloud the
Title:  name of their aged father, while her soft, dove-like eyes, sparkled with the
Title:  rays of hope.
Title:  
Title:  We are saved! we are saved! she murmured; to return to the arms of our dear,
Title:  dear father, and his heart will not be broken with grief. And you, too,
Title:  Cora, my sister, my more than sister, my mother; you, too, are spared. And
Title:  Duncan, she added, looking round upon the youth with a smile of ineffable
Title:  innocence, even our own brave and noble Duncan has escaped without a hurt.
Title:  
Title:  To these ardent and nearly innocent words Cora made no other answer than by
Title:  straining the youthful speaker to her heart, as she bent over her in melting
Title:  tenderness. The manhood of Heyward felt no shame in dropping tears over this
Title:  spectacle of affectionate rapture; and Uncas stood, fresh and blood-stained
Title:  from the combat, a calm, and, apparently, an unmoved looker-on, it is true,
Title:  but with eyes that had already lost their fierceness, and were beaming with
Title:  a sympathy that elevated him far above the intelligence, and advanced him
Title:  probably centuries before, the practises of his nation.
Title:  
Title:  During this display of emotions so natural in their situation, Hawkeye,
Title:  whose vigilant distrust had satisfied itself that the Hurons, who disfigured
Title:  the heavenly scene, no longer possessed the power to interrupt its harmony,
Title:  approached David, and liberated him from the bonds he had, until that
Title:  moment, endured with the most exemplary patience.
Title:  
Title:  There, exclaimed the scout, casting the last withe behind him, you are once
Title:  more master of your own limbs, though you seem not to use them with much
Title:  greater judgment than that in which they were first fashioned. If advice
Title:  from one who is not older than yourself, but who, having lived most of his
Title:  time in the wilderness, may be said to have experience beyond his years,
Title:  will give no offense, you are welcome to my thoughts; and these are, to part
Title:  with the little tooting instrument in your jacket to the first fool you meet
Title:  with, and buy some we'pon with the money, if it be only the barrel of a
Title:  horseman's pistol. By industry and care, you might thus come to some
Title:  prefarment; for by this time, I should think, your eyes would plainly tell
Title:  you that a carrion crow is a better bird than a mocking-thresher. The one
Title:  will, at least, remove foul sights from before the face of man, while the
Title:  other is only good to brew disturbances in the woods, by cheating the ears
Title:  of all that hear them.
Title:  
Title:  Arms and the clarion for the battle, but the song of thanksgiving to the
Title:  victory! answered the liberated David. Friend, he added, thrusting forth his
Title:  lean, delicate hand toward Hawkeye, in kindness, while his eyes twinkled and
Title:  grew moist, I thank thee that the hairs of my head still grow where they
Title:  were first rooted by Providence; for, though those of other men may be more
Title:  glossy and curling, I have ever found mine own well suited to the brain they
Title:  shelter. That I did not join myself to the battle, was less owing to
Title:  disinclination, than to the bonds of the heathen. Valiant and skillful hast
Title:  thou proved thyself in the conflict, and I hereby thank thee, before
Title:  proceeding to discharge other and more important duties, because thou hast
Title:  proved thyself well worthy of a Christian's praise.
Title:  
Title:  The thing is but a trifle, and what you may often see if you tarry long
Title:  among us, returned the scout, a good deal softened toward the man of song,
Title:  by this unequivocal expression of gratitude. I have got back my old
Title:  companion, killdeer, he added, striking his hand on the breech of his rifle;
Title:  and that in itself is a victory. These Iroquois are cunning, but they
Title:  outwitted themselves when they placed their firearms out of reach; and had
Title:  Uncas or his father been gifted with only their common Indian patience, we
Title:  should have come in upon the knaves with three bullets instead of one, and
Title:  that would have made a finish of the whole pack; yon loping varlet, as well
Title:  as his commerades. But 'twas all fore-ordered, and for the best.
Title:  
Title:  Thou sayest well, returned David, and hast caught the true spirit of
Title:  Christianity. He that is to be saved will be saved, and he that is
Title:  predestined to be damned will be damned. This is the doctrine of truth, and
Title:  most consoling and refreshing it is to the true believer.
Title:  
Title:  The scout, who by this time was seated, examining into the state of his
Title:  rifle with a species of parental assiduity, now looked up at the other in a
Title:  displeasure that he did not affect to conceal, roughly interrupting further
Title:  speech.
Title:  
Title:  Doctrine or no doctrine, said the sturdy woodsman, 'tis the belief of
Title:  knaves, and the curse of an honest man. I can credit that yonder Huron was
Title:  to fall by my hand, for with my own eyes I have seen it; but nothing short
Title:  of being a witness will cause me to think he has met with any reward, or
Title:  that Chingachgook there will be condemned at the final day.
Title:  
Title:  You have no warranty for such an audacious doctrine, nor any covenant to
Title:  support it, cried David who was deeply tinctured with the subtle
Title:  distinctions which, in his time , and more especially in his province, had
Title:  been drawn around the beautiful simplicity of revelation, by endeavoring to
Title:  penetrate the awful mystery of the divine nature, supplying faith by
Title:  self-sufficiency, and by consequence, involving those who reasoned from such
Title:  human dogmas in absurdities and doubt; your temple is reared on the sands,
Title:  and the first tempest will wash away its foundation. I demand your
Title:  authorities for such an uncharitable assertion (like other advocates of a
Title:  system, David was not always accurate in his use of terms). Name chapter and
Title:  verse; in which of the holy books do you find language to support you?
Title:  
Title:  Book! repeated Hawkeye, with singular and ill-concealed disdain; do you take
Title:  me for a whimpering boy at the apronstring of one of your old gals; and this
Title:  good rifle on my knee for the feather of a goose's wing, my ox's horn for a
Title:  bottle of ink, and my leathern pouch for a cross-barred handkercher to carry
Title:  my dinner? Book! what have such as I, who am a warrior of the wilderness,
Title:  though a man without a cross, to do with books? I never read but in one, and
Title:  the words that are written there are too simple and too plain to need much
Title:  schooling; though I may boast that of forty long and hard-working years.
Title:  
Title:  What call you the volume? said David, misconceiving the other's meaning.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis open before your eyes, returned the scout; and he who owns it is not a
Title:  niggard of its use. I have heard it said that there are men who read in
Title:  books to convince themselves there is a God. I know not but man may so
Title:  deform his works in the settlement, as to leave that which is so clear in
Title:  the wilderness a matter of doubt among traders and priests. If any such
Title:  there be, and he will follow me from sun to sun, through the windings of the
Title:  forest, he shall see enough to teach him that he is a fool, and that the
Title:  greatest of his folly lies in striving to rise to the level of One he can
Title:  never equal, be it in goodness, or be it in power.
Title:  
Title:  The instant David discovered that he battled with a disputant who imbibed
Title:  his faith from the lights of nature, eschewing all subtleties of doctrine,
Title:  he willingly abondoned a controversy from which he believed neither profit
Title:  nor credit was to be derived. While the scout was speaking, he had also
Title:  seated himself, and producing the ready little volume and the iron-rimmed
Title:  spectacles, he prepared to discharge a duty, which nothing but the
Title:  unexpected assault he had received in his orthodoxy could have so long
Title:  suspended. He was, in truth, a minstrel of the western continent - of a much
Title:  later day, certainly, than those gifted bards, who formerly sang the profane
Title:  renown of baron and prince, but after the spirit of his own age and country;
Title:  and he was now prepared to exercise the cunning of his craft, in celebration
Title:  of, or rather in thanksgiving for, the recent victory. He waited patiently
Title:  for Hawkeye to cease, then lifting his eyes, together with his voice, he
Title:  said, aloud:
Title:  
Title:  I invite you, friends, to join in praise for this signal deliverance from
Title:  the hands of barbarians and infidels, to the comfortable and solemn tones of
Title:  the tune called Northampton.
Title:  
Title:  He next named the page and verse where the rhymes selected were to be found,
Title:  and applied the pitch-pipe to his lips, with the decent gravity that he had
Title:  been wont to use in the temple. This time he was, however, without any
Title:  accompaniment, for the sisters were just then pouring out those tender
Title:  effusions of affection which have been already alluded to. Nothing deterred
Title:  by the smallness of his audience, which, in truth, consisted only of the
Title:  discontented scout, he raised his voice, commencing and ending the sacred
Title:  song without accident or interruption of any kind.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye listened while he coolly adjusted his flint and reloaded his rifle;
Title:  but the sounds, wanting the extraneous assistance of scene and sympathy,
Title:  failed to awaken his slumbering emotions. Never minstrel, or by whatever
Title:  more suitable name David should be known, drew upon his talents in the
Title:  presence of more insensible auditors; though considering the singleness and
Title:  sincerity of his motive, it is probably that no bard of profane song ever
Title:  uttered notes that ascended so near to that throne where all homage and
Title:  praise is due. The scout shook his head, and muttering some unintelligible
Title:  words, among which throat and Iroquois were alone audible, he walked away,
Title:  to collect and to examine into the state of the captured arsenal of the
Title:  Hurons. In this office he was now joined by Chingachgook, who found his own,
Title:  as well as the rifle of his son, among the arms. Even Heyward and David were
Title:  furnished with weapons; nor was ammunition wanting to render them all
Title:  effectual.
Title:  
Title:  When the foresters had made their selection, and distributed their prizes,
Title:  the scout announced that the hour had arrived when it was necessary to move.
Title:  By this time the song of Gamut had ceased, and the sisters had learned to
Title:  still the exhibition of their emotions. Aided by Duncan and the younger
Title:  Mohican, the two latter descended the precipitous sides of that hill which
Title:  they had so lately ascended under so very different auspices, and whose
Title:  summit had so nearly proved the scene of their massacre. At the foot they
Title:  found the Narragansetts browsing the herbage of the bushes, and having
Title:  mounted, they followed the movements of a guide, who, in the most deadly
Title:  straits, had so often proved himself their friend. The journey was, however,
Title:  short. Hawkeye, leaving the blind path that the Hurons had followed, turned
Title:  short to his right, and entering the thicket, he crossed a babbling brook,
Title:  and halted in a narrow dell, under the shade of a few water elms. Their
Title:  distance from the base of the fatal hill was but a few rods, and the steeds
Title:  had been serviceable only in crossing the shallow stream.
Title:  
Title:  The scout and the Indians appeared to be familiar with the sequestered place
Title:  where they now were; for, leaning their rifle against the trees, they
Title:  commenced throwing aside the dried leaves, and opening the blue clay, out of
Title:  which a clear and sparkling spring of bright, glancing water, quickly
Title:  bubbled. The white man then looked about him, as though seeking for some
Title:  object, which was not to be found as readily as he expected.
Title:  
Title:  Them careless imps, the Mohawks, with their Tuscarora and Onondaga brethren,
Title:  have been here slaking their thirst, he muttered, and the vagabonds have
Title:  thrown away the gourd! This is the way with benefits, when they are bestowed
Title:  on such disremembering hounds! Here has the Lord laid his hand, in the midst
Title:  of the howling wilderness, for their good, and raised a fountain of water
Title:  from the bowels of the 'arth, that might laugh at the richest shop of
Title:  apothecary's ware in all the colonies; and see! the knaves have trodden in
Title:  the clay, and deformed the cleanliness of the place, as though they were
Title:  brute beasts, instead of human men.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas silently extended toward him the desired gourd, which the spleen of
Title:  Hawkeye had hitherto prevented him from observing on a branch of an elm.
Title:  Filling it with water, he retired a short distance, to a place where the
Title:  ground was more firm and dry; here he coolly seated himself, and after
Title:  taking a long, and, apparently, a grateful draught, he commenced a very
Title:  strict examination of the fragments of food left by the Hurons, which had
Title:  hung in a wallet on his arm.
Title:  
Title:  Thank you, lad! he continued, returning the empty gourd to Uncas; now we
Title:  will see how these rampaging Hurons lived, when outlying in ambushments.
Title:  Look at this! The varlets know the better pieces of the deer; and one would
Title:  think they might carve and roast a saddle, equal to the best cook in the
Title:  land! But everything is raw, for the Iroquois are thorough savages. Uncas,
Title:  take my steel and kindle a fire; a mouthful of a tender broil will give
Title:  natur' a helping hand, after so long a trail.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, perceiving that their guides now set about their repast in sober
Title:  earnest, assisted the ladies to alight, and placed himself at their side,
Title:  not unwilling to enjoy a few moments of grateful rest, after the bloody
Title:  scene he had just gone through. While the culinary process was in hand,
Title:  curiosity induced him to inquire into the circumstances which had led to
Title:  their timely and unexpected rescue:
Title:  
Title:  How is it that we see you so soon, my generous friend, he asked, and without
Title:  aid from the garrison of Edward?
Title:  
Title:  Had we gone to the bend in the river, we might have been in time to rake the
Title:  leaves over your bodies, but too late to have saved your scalps, coolly
Title:  answered the scout. No, no; instead of throwing away strength and
Title:  opportunity by crossing to the fort, we lay by, under the bank of the
Title:  Hudson, waiting to watch the movements of the Hurons.
Title:  
Title:  You were, then, witnesses of all that passed?
Title:  
Title:  Not of all; for Indian sight is too keen to be easily cheated, and we kept
Title:  close. A difficult matter it was, too, to keep this Mohican boy snug in the
Title:  ambushment. Ah! Uncas, Uncas, your behavior was more like that of a curious
Title:  woman than of a warrior on his scent.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas permitted his eyes to turn for an instant on the sturdy countenance of
Title:  the speaker, but he neither spoke nor gave any indication of repentance. On
Title:  the contrary, Heyward thought the manner of the young Mohican was
Title:  disdainful, if not a little fierce, and that he suppressed passions that
Title:  were ready to explode, as much in compliment to the listeners, as from the
Title:  deference he usually paid to his white associate.
Title:  
Title:  You saw our capture? Heyward next demanded.
Title:  
Title:  We heard it, was the significant answer. An Indian yell is plain language to
Title:  men who have passed their days in the woods. But when you landed, we were
Title:  driven to crawl like sarpents, beneath the leaves; and then we lost sight of
Title:  you entirely, until we placed eyes on you again trussed to the trees, and
Title:  ready bound for an Indian massacre.
Title:  
Title:  Our rescue was the deed of Providence. It was nearly a miracle that you did
Title:  not mistake the path, for the Hurons divided, and each band had its horses.
Title:  
Title:  Ay! there we were thrown off the scent, and might, indeed, have lost the
Title:  trail, had it not been for Uncas; we took the path, however, that led into
Title:  the wilderness; for we judged, and judged rightly, that the savages would
Title:  hold that course with their prisoners. But when we had followed it for many
Title:  miles, without finding a single twig broken, as I had advised, my mind
Title:  misgave me; especially as all the footsteps had the prints of moccasins.
Title:  
Title:  Our captors had the precaution to see us shod like themselves, said Duncan,
Title:  raising a foot, and exhibiting the buckskin he wore.
Title:  
Title:  Aye, 'twas judgmatical and like themselves; though we were too expart to be
Title:  thrown from a trail by so common an invention.
Title:  
Title:  To what, then, are we indebted for our safety?
Title:  
Title:  To what, as a white man who has no taint of Indian blood, I should be
Title:  ashamed to own; to the judgment of the young Mohican, in matters which I
Title:  should know better than he, but which I can now hardly believe to be true,
Title:  though my own eyes tell me it is so.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis extraordinary! will you not name the reason?
Title:  
Title:  Uncas was bold enough to say, that the beasts ridden by the gentle ones,
Title:  continued Hawkeye, glancing his eyes, not without curious interest, on the
Title:  fillies of the ladies, planted the legs of one side on the ground at the
Title:  same time, which is contrary to the movements of all trotting four-footed
Title:  animals of my knowledge, except the bear. And yet here are horses that
Title:  always journey in this manner, as my own eyes have seen, and as their trail
Title:  has shown for twenty long miles.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis the merit of the animal! They come from the shores of Narrangansett
Title:  Bay, in the small province of Providence Plantations, and are celebrated for
Title:  their hardihood, and the ease of this peculiar movement; though other horses
Title:  are not unfrequently trained to the same.
Title:  
Title:  It may be - it may be, said Hawkeye, who had listened with singular
Title:  attention to this explanation; though I am a man who has the full blood of
Title:  the whites, my judgment in deer and beaver is greater than in beasts of
Title:  burden. Major Effingham has many noble chargers, but I have never seen one
Title:  travel after such a sidling gait.
Title:  
Title:  True; for he would value the animals for very different properties. Still is
Title:  this a breed highly esteemed and, as you witness, much honored with the
Title:  burdens it is often destined to bear.
Title:  
Title:  The Mohicans had suspended their operations about the glimmering fire to
Title:  listen; and, when Duncan had done, they looked at each other significantly,
Title:  the father uttering the never-failing exclamation of surprise. The scout
Title:  ruminated, like a man digesting his newly-acquired knowledge, and once more
Title:  stole a glance at the horses.
Title:  
Title:  I dare to say there are even stranger sights to be seen in the settlements!
Title:  he said, at length natur' is sadly abused by man, when he once gets the
Title:  mastery. But, go sidling or go straight, Uncas had seen the movement, and
Title:  their trail led us on to the broken bush. The outer branch, near the prints
Title:  of one of the horses, was bent upward, as a lady breaks a flower from its
Title:  stem, but all the rest were ragged and broken down, as if the strong hand of
Title:  a man had been tearing them! So I concluded that the cunning varments had
Title:  seen the twig bent, and had torn the rest, to make us believe a buck had
Title:  been feeling the boughs with his antlers.
Title:  
Title:  I do believe your sagacity did not deceive you; for some such thing
Title:  occurred!
Title:  
Title:  That was easy to see, added the scout, in no degree conscious of having
Title:  exhibited any extraordinary sagacity; and a very different matter it was
Title:  from a waddling horse! It then struck me the Mingoes would push for this
Title:  spring, for the knaves well know the vartue of its waters!
Title:  
Title:  Is it, then, so famous? demanded Heyward, examining, with a more curious
Title:  eye, the secluded dell, with its bubbling fountain, surrounded, as it was,
Title:  by earth of a deep, dingy brown.
Title:  
Title:  Few red-skins, who travel south and east of the great lakes but have heard
Title:  of its qualities. Will you taste for yourself?
Title:  
Title:  Heyward took the gourd, and after swallowing a little of the water, threw it
Title:  aside with grimaces of discontent. The scout laughed in his silent but
Title:  heartfelt manner, and shook his head with vast satisfaction.
Title:  
Title:  Ah! you want the flavor that one gets by habit; the time was when I liked it
Title:  as little as yourself; but I have come to my taste, and I now crave it, as a
Title:  deer does the licks.1 Your high-spiced wines are not better liked than a
Title:  red-skin relishes this water; especially when his natur' is ailing. But
Title:  Uncas has made his fire, and it is time we think of eating, for our journey
Title:  is long, and all before us.
Title:  
Title:  Interrrupting the dialogue by this abrupt transition, the scout had instant
Title:  recourse to the fragments of food which had escaped the voracity of the
Title:  Hurons. A very summary process completed the simple cookery, when he and the
Title:  Mohicans commenced their humble meal, with the silence and characteristic
Title:  diligence of men who ate in order to enable themselves to endure great and
Title:  unremitting toil.
Title:  
Title:  When this necessary, and, happily, grateful duty had been performed, each of
Title:  the foresters stooped and took a long and parting draught at that solitary
Title:  and silent spring,2 around which and its sister fountains, within fifty
Title:  years, the wealth, beauty and talents of a hemisphere were to assemble in
Title:  throngs, in pursuit of health and pleasure. Then Hawkeye announced his
Title:  determination to proceed. The sisters resumed their saddles; Duncan and
Title:  David grapsed their rifles, and followed on footsteps; the scout leading the
Title:  advance, and the Mohicans bringing up the rear. The whole party moved
Title:  swiftly through the narrow path, toward the north, leaving the healing
Title:  waters to mingle unheeded with the adjacent brooks and the bodies of the
Title:  dead to fester on the neighboring mount, without the rites of sepulture; a
Title:  fate but too common to the warriors of the woods to excite either
Title:  commiseration or comment.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 Many of the animals of the American forests resort to those spots where
Title:  salt springs are found. These are called licks or salt licks, in the
Title:  language of the country, from the circumstance that the quadruped is often
Title:  obliged to lick the earth, in order to obtain the saline particles. These
Title:  licks are great places of resort with the hunters, who waylay their game
Title:  near the paths that lead to them.
Title:  
Title:  2 The scene of the foregoing incidents is on the spot where the village of
Title:  Ballston now stands; one of the two principal watering places of America.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 13
Title:  
Title:       I'll seek a readier path.
Title:  
Title:                                                                 PARNELL
Title:  
Title:  The route taken by Hawkeye lay across those sandy plains, relived by
Title:  occasional valleys and swells of land, which had been traversed by their
Title:  party on the morning of the same day, with the baffled Magua for their
Title:  guide. The sun had now fallen low toward the distant mountains; and as their
Title:  journey lay through the interminable forest, the heat was no longer
Title:  oppressive. Their progress, in consequence, was proportionate; and long
Title:  before the twilight gathered about them, they had made good many toilsome
Title:  miles on their return.
Title:  
Title:  The hunter, like the savage whose place he filled, seemed to select among
Title:  the blind signs of their wild route, with a species of instinct, seldom
Title:  abating his speed, and never pausing to deliberate. A rapid and oblique
Title:  glance at the moss on the trees, with an occasional upward gaze toward the
Title:  setting sun, or a steady but passing look at the direction of the numerous
Title:  water courses, through which he waded, were sufficient to determine his
Title:  path, and remove his greatest difficulties. In the meantime, the forest
Title:  began to change its hues, losing that lively green which had embellished its
Title:  arches, in the graver light which is the usual precursor of the close of
Title:  day.
Title:  
Title:  While the eyes of the sisters were endeavoring to catch glimpses through the
Title:  trees, of the flood of golden glory which formed a glittering halo around
Title:  the sun, tinging here and there with ruby streaks, or bordering with narrow
Title:  edgings of shining yellow, a mass of clouds that lay piled at no great
Title:  distance above the western hills, Hawkeye turned suddenly and pointing
Title:  upward toward the gorgeous heavens, he spoke:
Title:  
Title:  Yonder is the signal given to man to seek his food and natural rest, he
Title:  said; better and wiser would it be, if he could understand the signs of
Title:  nature, and take a lesson from the fowls of the air and the beasts of the
Title:  field! Our night, however, will soon be over, for with the moon we must be
Title:  up and moving again. I remember to have fou't the Maquas, hereaways, in the
Title:  first war in which I ever drew blood from man; and we threw up a work of
Title:  blocks, to keep the ravenous varmints from handling our scalps. If my marks
Title:  do not fail me, we shall find the place a few rods further to our left.
Title:  
Title:  Without waiting for an assent, or, indeed, for any reply, the sturdy hunter
Title:  moved boldly into a dense thicket of young chestnuts, shoving aside the
Title:  branches of the exuberant shoots which nearly covered the ground, like a man
Title:  who expected, at each step, to discover some object he had formerly known.
Title:  The recollection of the scout did not deceive him. After penetrating through
Title:  the brush, matted as it was with briars, for a few hundred feet, he entered
Title:  an open space, that surrounded a low, green hillock, which was crowned by
Title:  the decayed blockhouse in question. This rude and neglected building was one
Title:  of those deserted works, which, having been thrown up on an emergency, had
Title:  been abandoned with the disappearance of danger, and was now quietly
Title:  crumbling in the solitude of the forest, neglected and nearly forgotten,
Title:  like the circumstances which had caused it to be reared. Such memorials of
Title:  the passage and struggles of man are yet frequent throughout the broad
Title:  barrier of wilderness which once separated the hostile provinces, and form a
Title:  species of ruins that are intimately associated with the recollections of
Title:  colonial history, and which are in appropriate keeping with the gloomy
Title:  character of the surrounding scenery.1 The roof of bark had long since
Title:  fallen, and mingled with the soil, but the huge logs of pine, which had been
Title:  hastily thrown together, still preserved their relative positions, though
Title:  one angle of the work had given way under the pressure, and threatened a
Title:  speedy downfall to the remainder of the rustic edifice. While Heyward and
Title:  his companions hesitated to approach a building so decayed, Hawkeye and the
Title:  Indians entered within the low walls, not only without fear, but with
Title:  obvious interest. While the former surveyed the ruins, both internally and
Title:  externally, with the curiosity of one whose recollections were reviving at
Title:  each moment, Chingachgook related to his son, in the language of the
Title:  Delawares, and with the pride of a conqueror, the brief history of the
Title:  skirmish which had been fought, in his youth, in that secluded spot. A
Title:  strain of melancholy, however, blended with his triumph, rendering his
Title:  voice, as usual, soft and musical.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, the sisters gladly dismounted, and prepared to enjoy their
Title:  halt in the coolness of the evening, and in a security which they believed
Title:  nothing but the beasts of the forest could invade.
Title:  
Title:  Would not our resting-place have been more retired, my worthy friend,
Title:  demanded the more vigilant Duncan, perceiving that the scout had already
Title:  finished his short survey, had we chosen a spot less known, and one more
Title:  rarely visited than this?
Title:  
Title:  Few live who know the blockhouse was ever raised, was the slow and musing
Title:  answer; 'tis not often that books are made, and narratives written of such a
Title:  scrimmage as was here fou't atween the Mohicans and the Mohawks, in a war of
Title:  their own waging. I was then a younker, and went out with the Delawares,
Title:  because I know'd they were a scandalized and wronged race. Forty days and
Title:  forty nights did the imps crave our blood around this pile of logs, which I
Title:  designed and partly reared, being, as you'll remember, no Indian myself, but
Title:  a man without a cross. The Delawares lent themselves to the work, and we
Title:  made it good, ten to twenty, until our numbers were nearly equal, and then
Title:  we sallied out upon the hounds, and not a man of them ever got back to tell
Title:  the fate of his party. Yes, yes; I was then young, and new to the sight of
Title:  blood; and not relishing the thought that creatures who had spirits like
Title:  myself should lay on the naked ground, to be torn asunder by beasts, or to
Title:  bleach in the rains, I buried the dead with my own hands, under that very
Title:  little hillock where you have placed yourselves; and no bad seat does it
Title:  make neither, though it be raised by the bones of mortal men.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward and the sisters arose, on the instant, from the grassy sepulcher;
Title:  nor could the two latter, notwithstanding the terrific scenes they had so
Title:  recently passed through, entirely suppress an emotion of natural horror,
Title:  when they found themselves in such familiar contact with the grave of the
Title:  dead Mohawks. The gray light, the gloomy little area of dark grass,
Title:  surrounded by its border of brush, beyond which the pines rose, in breathing
Title:  silence, apparently into the very clouds, and the deathlike stillness of the
Title:  vast forest, were all in unison to deepen such a sensation. They are gone,
Title:  and they are harmless, continued Hawkeye, waving his hand, with a melancholy
Title:  smile at their manifest alarm; they'll never shout the war-whoop nor strike
Title:  a blow with the tomahawk again! And of all those who aided in placing them
Title:  where they lie, Chingachgook and I only are living! The brothers and family
Title:  of the Mohican formed our war party; and you see before you all that are now
Title:  left of his race.
Title:  
Title:  The eyes of the listeners involuntarily sought the forms of the Indians,
Title:  with a compassionate interest in their desolate fortune. Their dark persons
Title:  were still to be seen within the shadows of the blockhouse, the son
Title:  listening to the relation of his father with that sort of intenseness which
Title:  would be created by a narrative that redounded so much to the honor of those
Title:  whose names he had long revered for their courage and savage virtues.
Title:  
Title:  I had thought the Delawares a pacific people, said Duncan, and that they
Title:  never waged war in person; trusting the defense of their hands to those very
Title:  Mohawks that you slew!
Title:  
Title:  'Tis true in part, returned the scout, and yet, at the bottom, 'tis a wicked
Title:  lie. Such a treaty was made in ages gone by, through the deviltries of the
Title:  Dutchers, who wished to disarm the natives that had the best right to the
Title:  country, where they had settled themselves. The Mohicans, though a part of
Title:  the same nation, having to deal with the English, never entered into the
Title:  silly bargain, but kept to their manhood; as in truth did the Delawares,
Title:  when their eyes were open to their folly. You see before you a chief of the
Title:  great Mohican Sagamores! Once his family could chase their deer over tracts
Title:  of country wider than that which belongs to the Albany Patteroon, without
Title:  crossing brook or hill that was not their on; but what is left of their
Title:  descendant? He may find his six feet of earth when God chooses, and keep it
Title:  in peace, perhaps, if he has a friend who will take the pains to sink his
Title:  head so low that the plowshares cannot reach it!
Title:  
Title:  Enough! said Heyward, apprehensive that the subject might lead to a
Title:  discussion that would interrupt the harmony so necessary to the preservation
Title:  of his fair companions; we have journeyed far, and few among us are blessed
Title:  with forms like that of yours, which seems to know neither fatigue nor
Title:  weakness.
Title:  
Title:  The sinews and bones of a man carry me through it all, said the hunter,
Title:  surveying his muscular limbs with a simplicity that betrayed the honest
Title:  pleasure the compliment afforded him; there are larger and heavier men to be
Title:  found in the settlements, but you might travel many days in a city before
Title:  you could meet one able to walk fifty miles without stopping to take breath,
Title:  or who has kept the hounds within hearing during a chase of hours. However,
Title:  as flesh and blood are not always the same, it is quite reasonable to
Title:  suppose that the gentle ones are willing to rest, after all they have seen
Title:  and done this day. Uncas, clear out the spring, while your father and I make
Title:  a cover for their tender heads of these chestnut shoots, and a bed of grass
Title:  and leaves.
Title:  
Title:  The dialogue ceased, while the hunter and his companions busied themselves
Title:  in preparations for the comfort and protection of those they guided. A
Title:  spring, which many long years before had induced the natives to select the
Title:  place for their temporary fortification, was soon cleared of leaves, and a
Title:  fountain of crystal gushed from the bed, diffusing its waters over the
Title:  verdant hillock. A corner of the building was then roofed in such a manner
Title:  as to exclude the heavy dew of the climate, and piles of sweet shrubs and
Title:  dried leaves were laid beneath it for the sisters to repose on.
Title:  
Title:  While the diligent woodsmen were employed in this manner, Cora and Alice
Title:  partook of that refreshment which duty required much more than inclination
Title:  prompted them to accept. They then retired within the walls, and first
Title:  offering up their thanksgivings for past mercies, and petitioning for a
Title:  continuance of the Divine favor throughout the coming night, they laid their
Title:  tender forms on the fragrant couch, and in spite of recollections and
Title:  forebodings, soon sank into those slumbers which nature so imperiously
Title:  demanded, and which were sweetened by hopes for the morrow. Duncan had
Title:  prepared himself to pass the night in watchfulness near them, just without
Title:  the ruin, but the scout, perceiving his intention, pointed toward
Title:  Chingachgook, as he coolly disposed his own person on the grass, and said:
Title:  
Title:  The eyes of a white man are too heavy and too blind for such a watch as
Title:  this! The Mohican will be our sentinel, therefore let us sleep.
Title:  
Title:  I proved myself a sluggard on my post during the past night, said Heyward,
Title:  and have less need of repose than you, who did more credit to the character
Title:  of a soldier. Let all the party seek their rest, then, while I hold the
Title:  guard.
Title:  
Title:  If we lay among the white tents of the Sixtieth, and in front of an enemy
Title:  like the French, I could not ask for a better watchman, returned the scout;
Title:  but in the darkness and among the signs of the wilderness your judgment
Title:  would be like the folly of a child, and your vigilance thrown away. Do then,
Title:  like Uncas and myself, sleep, and sleep in safety.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward perceived, in truth, that the younger Indian had thrown his form on
Title:  the side of the hillock while they were talking, like one who sought to make
Title:  the most of the time allotted to rest, and that his example had been
Title:  followed by David, whose voice literally clove to his jaws, with the fever
Title:  of his wound, heightened, as it was, by their toilsome march. Unwilling to
Title:  prolong a useless discussion, the young man affected to comply, by posting
Title:  his back against the logs of the blockhouse, in a half recumbent posture,
Title:  though resolutely determined, in his own mind, not to close an eye until he
Title:  had delivered his precious charge into the arms of Munro himself. Hawkeye,
Title:  believing he had prevailed, soon fell asleep, and a silence as deep as the
Title:  solitude in which they had found it, pervaded the retired spot.
Title:  
Title:  For many minutes Duncan succeeded in keeping his senses on the alert, and
Title:  alive to every moaning sound that arose from the forest. His vision became
Title:  more acute as the shades of evening settled on the place; and even after the
Title:  stars were glimmering above his head, he was able to distinguish the
Title:  recumbent forms of his companions, as they lay stretched on the grass, and
Title:  to note the person of Chingachgook, who sat upright and motionless as one of
Title:  the trees which formed the dark barrier on every side. He still heard the
Title:  gentle breathings of the sisters, who lay within a few feet of him, and not
Title:  a leaf was ruffled by the passing air of which his ear did not detect the
Title:  whispering sound. At length, however, the mournful notes of a whip-poor-will
Title:  became blended with the moanings of an owl; his heavy eyes occasionally
Title:  sought the bright rays of the stars, and he then fancied he saw them through
Title:  the fallen lids. At instants of momentary wakefulness he mistook a bush for
Title:  his associate sentinel; his head next sank upon his shoulder, which, in its
Title:  turn, sought the support of the ground; and, finally, his whole person
Title:  became relaxed and pliant, and the young man sank into a deep sleep,
Title:  dreaming that he was a knight of ancient chivalry, holding his midnight
Title:  vigils before the tent of a recaptured princess, whose favor he did not
Title:  despair of gaining, by such a proof of devotion and watchfulness.
Title:  
Title:  How long the tired Duncan lay in this insensible state he never knew
Title:  himself, but his slumbering visions had been long lost in total
Title:  forgetfulness, when he was awakened by a light tap on the shoulder. Aroused
Title:  by this signal, slight as it was, he sprang upon his feet with a confused
Title:  recollection of the self-imposed duty he had assumed with the commencement
Title:  of the night.
Title:  
Title:  Who comes? he demanded, feeling for his sword, at the place where it was
Title:  usually suspended. Speak! friend or enemy?
Title:  
Title:  Friend, replied the low voice of Chingachgook; who, pointing upward at the
Title:  luminary which was shedding its mild light through the opening in the trees,
Title:  directly in their bivouac, immediately added, in his rude English: Moon
Title:  comes and white man's fort far - far off; time to move, when sleep shuts
Title:  both eyes of the Frenchman!
Title:  
Title:  You say true! Call up your friends, and bridle the horses while I prepare my
Title:  own companions for the march!
Title:  
Title:  We are awake, Duncan, said the soft, silvery tones of Alice within the
Title:  building, and ready to travel very fast after so refreshing a sleep; but you
Title:  have watched through the tedious night in our behalf, after having endured
Title:  so much fatigue the livelong day!
Title:  
Title:  Say, rather, I would have watched, but my treacherous eyes betrayed me;
Title:  twice have I proved myself unfit for the trust I bear.
Title:  
Title:  Nay, Duncan, deny it not, interrupted the smiling Alice, issuing from the
Title:  shadows of the building into the light of the moon, in all the loveliness of
Title:  her freshened beauty; I know you to be a heedless one, when self is the
Title:  object of your care, and but too vigilant in favor of others. Can we not
Title:  tarry here a little longer while you find the rest you need? Cheerfully,
Title:  most cheerfully, will Cora and I keep the vigils, while you and all these
Title:  brave men endeavor to snatch a little sleep!
Title:  
Title:  If shame could cure me of my drowsiness, I should never close an eye again,
Title:  said the uneasy youth, gazing at the ingenuous countenance of Alice, where,
Title:  however, in its sweet solicitude, he read nothing to confirm his
Title:  half-awakened suspicion. It is but too true, that after leading you into
Title:  danger by my heedlessness, I have not even the merit of guarding your
Title:  pillows as should become a soldier.
Title:  
Title:  No one but Duncan himself should accuse Duncan of such a weakness. Go, then,
Title:  and sleep; believe me, neither of us, weak girls as we are, will betray our
Title:  watch.
Title:  
Title:  The young man was relieved from the awkwardness of making any further
Title:  protestations of his own demerits, by an exclamation from Chingachgook, and
Title:  the attitude of riveted attention assumed by his son.
Title:  
Title:  The Mohicans hear an enemy! whispered Hawkeye, who, by this time, in common
Title:  with the whole party, was awake and stirring. They scent danger in the wind!
Title:  
Title:  God forbid! exclaimed Heyward. Surely we have had enough of bloodshed!
Title:  
Title:  While he spoke, however, the young soldier seized his rifle, and advancing
Title:  toward the front, prepared to atone for his venial remissness, by freely
Title:  exposing his life in defense of those he attended.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis some creature of the forest prowling around us in quest of food, he
Title:  said, in a whisper, as soon as the low, and apparently distant sounds, which
Title:  had startled the Mohicans, reached his own ears.
Title:  
Title:  Hist! returned the attentive scout; 'tis man; even I can now tell his tread,
Title:  poor as my senses are when compared to an Indian's! That Scampering Huron
Title:  has fallen in with one of Montcalm's outlying parties, and they have struck
Title:  upon our trail. I shouldn't like, myself, to spill more human blood in this
Title:  spot, he added, looking around with anxiety in his features, at the dim
Title:  objects by which he was surrounded; but what must be, must! Lead the horses
Title:  into the blockhouse, Uncas; and, friends, do you follow to the same shelter.
Title:  Poor and old as it is, it offers a cover, and has rung with the crack of a
Title:  rifle afore to-night!
Title:  
Title:  He was instantly obeyed, the Mohicans leading the Narrangansetts within the
Title:  ruin, whither the whole party repaired with the most guarded silence.
Title:  
Title:  The sound of approaching footsteps were now too distinctly audible to leave
Title:  any doubts as to the nature of the interruption. They were soon mingled with
Title:  voices calling to each other in an Indian dialect, which the hunter, in a
Title:  whisper, affirmed to Heyward was the language of the Hurons. When the party
Title:  reached the point where the horses had entered the thicket which surrounded
Title:  the blockhouse, they were evidently at fault, having lost those marks which,
Title:  until that moment, had directed their pursuit.
Title:  
Title:  It would seem by the voices that twenty men were soon collected at that one
Title:  spot, mingling their different opinions and advice in noisy clamor.
Title:  
Title:  The knaves know our weakness, whispered Hawkeye, who stood by the side of
Title:  Heyward, in deep shade, looking through an opening in the logs, or they
Title:  wouldn't indulge their idleness in such a squaw's march. Listen to the
Title:  reptiles! each man among them seems to have two tongues, and but a single
Title:  leg.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, brave as he was in the combat, could not, in such a moment of
Title:  painful suspense, make any reply to the cool and characteristic remark of
Title:  the scout. He only grasped his rifle more firmly, and fastened his eyes upon
Title:  the narrow opening, through which he gazed upon the moonlight view with
Title:  increasing anxiety. The deeper tones of one who spoke as having authority
Title:  were next heard, amid a silence that denoted the respect with which his
Title:  orders, or rather advice, was received. After which, by the rustling of
Title:  leaves, and crackling of dried twigs, it was apparent the savages were
Title:  separating in pursuit of the lost trail. Fortunately for the pursued, the
Title:  light of the moon, while it shed a flood of mild luster upon the little area
Title:  around the ruin, was not sufficiently strong to penetrate the deep arches of
Title:  the forest, where the objects still lay in deceptive shadow. The search
Title:  proved fruitless; for so short and sudden had been the passage from the
Title:  faint path the travelers had journeyed into the thicket, that every trace of
Title:  their footsteps was lost in the obscurity of the woods.
Title:  
Title:  It was not long, however, before the restless savages were heard beating the
Title:  brush, and gradually approaching the inner edge of that dense border of
Title:  young chestnuts which encircled the little area.
Title:  
Title:  They are coming, muttered Heyward, endeavoring to thrust his rifle through
Title:  the chink in the logs; let us fire on their approach.
Title:  
Title:  Keep everything in the shade, returned the scout; the snapping of a flint,
Title:  or even the smell of a single karnel of the brimstone, would bring the
Title:  hungry varlets upon us in a body. Should it please God that we must give
Title:  battle for the scalps, trust to the experience of men who know the ways of
Title:  the savages, and who are not often backward when the war-whoop is howled.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan cast his eyes behind him, and saw that the trembling sisters were
Title:  cowering in the far corner of the building, while the Mohicans stood in the
Title:  shadow, like two upright posts, ready, and apparently willing, to strike
Title:  when the blow should be needed. Curbing his impatience, he again looked out
Title:  upon the area, and awaited the result in silence. At that instant the
Title:  thicket opened, and a tall and armed Huron advanced a few paces into the
Title:  open space. As he gazed upon the silent blockhouse, the moon fell upon his
Title:  swarthy countenance, and betrayed its surprise and curiosity. He made the
Title:  exclamation which usually accompanies the former emotion in an Indian, and,
Title:  calling in a low voice, soon drew a companion to his side.
Title:  
Title:  These children of the woods stood together for several moments pointing at
Title:  the crumbling edifice, and conversing in the unintelligible language of
Title:  their tribe. They then approached, though with slow and cautious steps,
Title:  pausing every instant to look at the building, like startled deer whose
Title:  curiosity struggled powerfully with their awakened apprehensions for the
Title:  mastery. The foot of one of them suddenly rested on the mound, and he
Title:  stopped to examine its nature. At this moment, Heyward observed that the
Title:  scout loosened his knife in its sheath, and lowered the muzzle of his rifle.
Title:  Imitating these movements, the young man prepared himself for the struggle
Title:  which now seemed inevitable.
Title:  
Title:  The savages were so near, that the least motion in one of the horses, or
Title:  even a breath louder than common, would have betrayed the fugitives. But in
Title:  discovering the character of the mound, the attention of the Hurons appeared
Title:  directed to a different object. They spoke together, and the sounds of their
Title:  voices were low and solemn, as if influenced by a reverence that was deeply
Title:  blended with awe. Then they drew warily back, keeping their eyes riveted on
Title:  the ruin, as if they expected to see the apparitions of the dead issue from
Title:  its silent walls, until, having reached the boundary of the area, they moved
Title:  slowly into the thicket and disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye dropped the breech of his rifle to the earth, and drawing a long,
Title:  free breath, exclaimed, in an audible whisper:
Title:  
Title:  Ay! they respect the dead, and it has this time saved their own lives, and,
Title:  it may be, the lives of better men too.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward lent his attention for a single moment to his companion, but without
Title:  replying, he again turned toward those who just then interested him more. He
Title:  heard the two Hurons leave the bushes, and it was soon plain that all the
Title:  pursuers were gathered about them, in deep attention to their report. After
Title:  a few minutes of earnest and solemn dialogue, altogether different from the
Title:  noisy clamor with which they had first collected about the spot, the sounds
Title:  grew fainter and more distant, and finally were lost in the depths of the
Title:  forest.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye waited until a signal from the listening Chingachgook assured him
Title:  that every sound from the retiring party was completely swallowed by the
Title:  distance, when he motioned to Heyward to lead forth the horses, and to
Title:  assist the sisters into their saddles. The instant this was done they issued
Title:  through the broken gateway, and stealing out by a direction opposite to the
Title:  one by which they entered, they quitted the spot, the sisters casting
Title:  furtive glances at the silent, grave and crumbling ruin, as they left the
Title:  soft light of the moon, to bury themselves in the gloom of the woods.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 Some years since, the writer was shooting in the vicinity of the ruins of
Title:  Fort Oswego, which stands on the shoes of Lake Ontario. His game was deer,
Title:  and his chase a forest that stretched, with little interruption, fifty miles
Title:  inland. Unexpectedly he came upon six or eight ladders lying in the woods
Title:  within a short distance of each other. They were rudely made and much
Title:  decayed. Wondering what could have assembled so many of these instruments in
Title:  such a place, he sought an old man who resided near for the explanation.
Title:  
Title:  During the war of 1776 Fort Oswego was held by the British. An expedition
Title:  had been sent two hundred miles through the wilderness to surprise the fort.
Title:  It appears that the Americans, on reaching the spot named, which was within
Title:  a mile or two of the fort, first learned that they were expected, and in
Title:  great danger of being cut off. They threw away their scaling ladders, and
Title:  made a rapid retreat. These ladders had lain unmolested thirty years, in the
Title:  spot where they had thus been cast.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 14
Title:  
Title:       Guard: Qui est l?
Title:       Puc: Paisans, pauvres gens de France.
Title:  
Title:                                                           KING HENRY VI
Title:  
Title:  During the rapid movement from the blockhouse, and until the party was
Title:  deeply buried in the forest, each individual was too much interested in the
Title:  escape to hazard a word even in whispers. The scout resumed his post in
Title:  advance, though his steps, after he had thrown a safe distance between
Title:  himself and his enemies, were more deliberate than in their previous march,
Title:  in consequence of his utter ignorance of the localities of the surrounding
Title:  woods. More than once he halted to consult with his confederates, the
Title:  Mohicans, pointing upward at the moon, and examining the barks of the trees
Title:  with care. In these brief pauses, Heyward and the sisters listened, with
Title:  senses rendered doubly acute by the danger, to detect any symptoms which
Title:  might announce the proximity of their foes. At such moments, it seemed as if
Title:  a vast range of country lay buried in eternal sleep; not the least sound
Title:  arising from the forest, unless it was the distant and scarcely audible
Title:  rippling of a water-course. Birds, beasts, and man, appeared to slumber
Title:  alike, if, indeed, any of the latter were to be found in that wide tract of
Title:  wilderness. But the sounds of the rivulet, feeble and murmuring as they
Title:  were, relieved the guides at once from no trifling embarrassment, and toward
Title:  it they immediately held their way.
Title:  
Title:  When the banks of the little stream were gained, Hawkeye made another halt;
Title:  and taking the moccasins from his feet, he invited Heyward and Gamut to
Title:  follow his example. He then entered the water, and for near an hour they
Title:  traveled in the bed of the brook, leaving no trail. The moon had already
Title:  sunk into an immense pile of black clouds, which lay impending above the
Title:  western horizon, when they issued from the low and devious water-course to
Title:  rise again to the light and level of the sandy but wooded plain. Here the
Title:  scout seemed to be once more at home, for he held on this way with the
Title:  certainty and diligence of a man who moved in the security of his own
Title:  knowledge. The path soon became more uneven, and the travelers could plainly
Title:  perceive that the mountains drew nigher to them on each hand, and that they
Title:  were, in truth, about entering one of their gorges. Suddenly, Hawkeye made a
Title:  pause, and, waiting until he was joined by the whole party, he spoke, though
Title:  in tones so low and cautious, that they added to the solemnity of his words,
Title:  in the quiet and darkness of the place.
Title:  
Title:  It is easy to know the pathways, and to find the licks and water-courses of
Title:  the wilderness, he said; but who that saw this spot could venture to say,
Title:  that a mighty army was at rest among yonder silent trees and barren
Title:  mountains?
Title:  
Title:  We are, then, at no great distance from William Henry? said Heyward,
Title:  advancing nigher to the scout.
Title:  
Title:  It is yet a long and weary path, and when and where to strike it is now our
Title:  greatest difficulty. See, he said, pointing through the trees toward a spot
Title:  where a little basin of water reflected the stars from its placid bosom,
Title:  here is the bloody pond'; and I am on ground that I have not only often
Title:  traveled, but over which I have fou't the enemy, from the rising to the
Title:  setting sun.
Title:  
Title:  Ha! that sheet of dull and dreary water, then, is the sepulcher of the brave
Title:  men who fell in the contest. I have heard it named, but never have I stood
Title:  on its banks before.
Title:  
Title:  Three battles did we make with the Dutch-Frenchman1 in a day, continued
Title:  Hawkeye, pursuing the train of his own thoughts, rather than replying to the
Title:  remark of Duncan. He met us hard by, in our outward march to ambush his
Title:  advance, and scattered us, like driven deer, through the defile, to the
Title:  shores of Horican. Then we rallied behind our fallen trees, and made head
Title:  against him, under Sir William - who was made Sir William for that very
Title:  deed; and well did we pay him for the disgrace of the morning! Hundreds of
Title:  Frenchmen saw the sun that day for the last time; and even their leader,
Title:  Dieskau himself, fell into our hands, so cut and torn with the lead, that he
Title:  has gone back to his own country, unfit for further acts in war.
Title:  
Title:  'Twas a noble repulse! exclaimed Heyward, in the heat of his youthful ardor;
Title:  the fame of it reached us early, in our southern army.
Title:  
Title:  Ay! but it did not end there. I was sent by Major Effingham, at Sir
Title:  William's own bidding, to outflank the French, and carry the tidings of
Title:  their disaster across the portage, to the fort on the Hudson. Just hereaway,
Title:  where you see the trees rise into a mountain swell, I met a party coming
Title:  down to our aid, and I led them where the enemy were taking their meal,
Title:  little dreaming that they had not finished the bloody work of the day.
Title:  
Title:  And you surprised them?
Title:  
Title:  If death can be a surprise to men who are thinking only of the cravings of
Title:  their appetites. We gave them but little breathing time, for they had borne
Title:  hard upon us in the fight of the morning, and there were few in our party
Title:  who had not lost friend or relative by their hands.
Title:  
Title:  When all was over, the dead, and some say the dying, were cast into that
Title:  little pond. These eyes have seen its waters colored with blood, as natural
Title:  water never yet flowed from the bowels of the 'arth.
Title:  
Title:  It was a convenient, and, I trust, will prove a peaceful grave for a
Title:  soldier. You have then seen much service on this frontier?
Title:  
Title:  Ay! said the scout, erecting his tall person with an air of military pride;
Title:  there are not many echoes among these hills that haven't rung with the crack
Title:  of my rifle, nor is there the space of a square mile atwixt Horican and the
Title:  river, that killdeer hasn't dropped a living body on, be it an enemy or be
Title:  it a brute beast. As for the grave there being as quiet as you mention, it
Title:  is another matter. There are them in the camp who say and think, man, to lie
Title:  still, should not be buried while the breath is in the body; and certain it
Title:  is that in the hurry of that evening, the doctors had but little time to say
Title:  who was living and who was dead. Hist! see you nothing walking on the shore
Title:  of the pond?
Title:  
Title:  'Tis not probable that any are as houseless as ourselves in this dreary
Title:  forest.
Title:  
Title:  Such as he may care but little for house or shelter, and night dew can never
Title:  wet a body that passes its days in the water, returned the scout, grasping
Title:  the shoulder of Heyward with such convulsive strength as to make the young
Title:  soldier painfully sensible how much superstitious terror had got the mastery
Title:  of a man usually so dauntless.
Title:  
Title:  By heaven, there is a human form, and it approaches! Stand to your arms, my
Title:  friends; for we know not whom we encounter.
Title:  
Title:  Qui vive? demanded a stern, quick voice, which sounded like a challenge from
Title:  another world, issuing out of that solitary and solemn place.
Title:  
Title:  What says it? whispered the scout; it speaks neither Indian nor English.
Title:  
Title:  Qui vive? repeated the same voice, which was quickly followed by the
Title:  rattling of arms, and a menacing attitude.
Title:  
Title:  France! cried Heyward, advancing from the shadow of the trees to the shore
Title:  of the pond, within a few yards of the sentinel.
Title:  
Title:  D'o venez-vous - o allez-vous, d'aussi bonne heure? demanded the
Title:  grenadier, in the language and with the accent of a man from old France.
Title:  
Title:  Je viens de la dcouverte, et je vais me coucher.
Title:  
Title:  Etes-vous officier du roi?
Title:  
Title:  Sans doute, mon camarade; me prends-tu pour un provincial! Je suis capitaine
Title:  de chasseurs (Heyward well knew that the other was of a regiment in the
Title:  line); j'ai ici, avec moi, les filles du commandant de la fortification.
Title:  Aha! tu en as entendu parler! je les ai fait prisonnires prs de l'autre
Title:  fort, et je les conduis au gnral.
Title:  
Title:  Ma foi! mesdames; j'en suis fch pour vous, exlaimed the young soldier,
Title:  touching his cap with grace; mais - fortune de guerre! vous trouverez notre
Title:  gnral un brave homme, et bien poli avec les dames.
Title:  
Title:  C'est le caractre des gens de guerre, said Cora, with admirable
Title:  self-possession. Adieu, mon ami; je vous souhaiterais un devoir plus
Title:  agrable  remplir.
Title:  
Title:  The soldier made a low and humble acknowledgment for her civility; and
Title:  Heyward adding a Bonne nuit, mon camarade, they moved deliberately forward,
Title:  leaving the sentinel pacing the banks of the silent pond, little suspecting
Title:  an enemy of so much effrontery, and humming to himself those words which
Title:  were recalled to his mind by the sight of women, and, perhaps, by
Title:  recollections of his own distant and beautiful France:
Title:  
Title:       Vive le vin, vive l'amour, &c., &c.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis well you understood the knave! whispered the scout, when they had
Title:  gained a little distance from the place, and letting his rifle fall into the
Title:  hollow of his arm again; I soon saw that he was one of them uneasy
Title:  Frenchers; and well for him it was that his speech was friendly and his
Title:  wishes kind, or a place might have been found for his bones among those of
Title:  his countrymen.
Title:  
Title:  He was interrupted by a long and heavy groan which arose from the little
Title:  basin, as though, in truth, the spirits of the departed lingered about their
Title:  watery sepulcher.
Title:  
Title:  Surely it was of flesh, continued the scout; no spirit could handle its arms
Title:  so steadily.
Title:  
Title:  It was of flesh; but whether the poor fellow still belongs to this world may
Title:  well be doubted, said Heyward, glancing his eyes around him, and missing
Title:  Chingachgook from their little band. Another groan more faint than the
Title:  former was succeeded by a heavy and sullen plunge into the water, and all
Title:  was still again as if the borders of the dreary pool had never been awakened
Title:  from the silence of creation. While they yet hesitated in uncertainty, the
Title:  form of the Indian was seen gliding out of the thicket. As the chief
Title:  rejoined them, with one hand he attached the reeking scalp of the
Title:  unfortunate young Frenchman to his girdle, and with the other he replaced
Title:  the knife and tomahawk that had drunk his blood. He then took his wonted
Title:  station, with the air of a man who believed he had done a deed of merit.
Title:  
Title:  The scout dropped one end of his rifle to the earth, and leaning his hands
Title:  on the other, he stood musing in profound silence. Then, shaking his head in
Title:  a mournful manner, he muttered:
Title:  
Title:  'Twould have been a cruel and an unhuman act for a white-skin; but 'tis the
Title:  gift and natur' of an Indian, and I suppose it should not be denied. I could
Title:  wish, though it had befallen an accursed Mingo, rather than that gay young
Title:  boy from the old countries.
Title:  
Title:  Enough! said Heyward, apprehensive the unconscious sisters might comprehend
Title:  the nature of the detention, and conquering his disgust by a train of
Title:  reflections very much like that of the hunter; 'tis done; and though better
Title:  it were left undone, cannot be amended. You see, we are, too obviously
Title:  within the sentinels of the enemy; what course do you propose to follow?
Title:  
Title:  Yes, said Hawkeye, rousing himself again; 'tis as you say, too late to
Title:  harbor further thoughts about it. Ay, the French have gathered around the
Title:  fort in good earnest and we have a delicate needle to thread in passing
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  And but little time to do it in, added Heyward, glancing his eyes upwards,
Title:  toward the bank of vapor that concealed the setting moon.
Title:  
Title:  And little time to do it in! repeated the scout. The thing may be done in
Title:  two fashions, by the help of Providence, without which it may not be done at
Title:  all.
Title:  
Title:  Name them quickly for time presses.
Title:  
Title:  One would be to dismount the gentle ones, and let their beasts range the
Title:  plain, by sending the Mohicans in front, we might then cut a lane through
Title:  their sentries, and enter the fort over the dead bodies.
Title:  
Title:  It will not do - it will not do! interrupted the generous Heyward; a soldier
Title:  might force his way in this manner, but never with such a convoy.
Title:  
Title:  'Twould be, indeed, a bloody path for such tender feet to wade in, returned
Title:  the equally reluctant scout; but I thought it befitting my manhood to name
Title:  it. We must, then, turn in our trail and get without the line of their
Title:  lookouts, when we will bend short to the west, and enter the mountains;
Title:  where I can hide you, so that all the devil's hounds in Montcalm's pay would
Title:  be thrown off the scent for months to come.
Title:  
Title:  Let it be done, and that instantly.
Title:  
Title:  Further words were unnecessary; for Hawkeye, merely uttering the mandate to
Title:  follow, moved along the route by which they had just entered their present
Title:  critical and even dangerous situation. Their progress, like their late
Title:  dialogue, was guarded, and without noise; for none knew at what moment a
Title:  passing patrol, or a crouching picket of the enemy, might rise upon their
Title:  path. As they held their silent way along the margin of the pond, again
Title:  Heyward and the scout stole furtive glances at its appalling dreariness.
Title:  They looked in vain for the form they had so recently seen stalking along in
Title:  silent shores, while a low and regular wash of the little waves, by
Title:  announcing that the waters were not yet subsided, furnished a frightful
Title:  memorial of the deed of blood they had just witnessed. Like all that passing
Title:  and gloomy scene, the low basin, however, quickly melted in the darkness,
Title:  and became blended with the mass of black objects in the rear of the
Title:  travelers.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye soon deviated from the line of their retreat, and striking off
Title:  towards the mountains which form the western boundary of the narrow plain,
Title:  he led his followers, with swift steps, deep within the shadows that were
Title:  cast from their high and broken summits. The route was now painful; lying
Title:  over ground ragged with rocks, and intersected with ravines, and their
Title:  progress proportionately slow. Bleak and black hills lay on every side of
Title:  them, compensating in some degree for the additional toil of the march by
Title:  the sense of security they imparted. At length the party began slowly to
Title:  rise a steep and rugged ascent, by a path that cruiously wound among rocks
Title:  and trees, avoiding the one and supported by the other, in a manner that
Title:  showed it had been devised by men long practised in the arts of the
Title:  wilderness. As they gradually rose from the level of the valleys, the thick
Title:  darkness which usually precedes the approach of day began to disperse, and
Title:  objects were seen in the plain and palpable colors with which they had been
Title:  gifted by nature. When they issued from the stunted woods which clung to the
Title:  barren sides of the mountain, upon a flat and mossy rock that formed its
Title:  summit, they met the morning, as it came blushing above the green pines of a
Title:  hill that lay on the opposite side of the valley of the Horican.
Title:  
Title:  The scout now told the sisters to dismount; and taking the bridles from the
Title:  mouths, and the saddles off the backs of the jaded beasts, he turned them
Title:  loose, to glean a scanty subsistence among the shrubs and meager herbage of
Title:  that elevated region.
Title:  
Title:  Go, he said, and seek your food where natur' gives it to you; and beware
Title:  that you become not food to ravenous wolves yourselves, among these hills.
Title:  
Title:  Have we no further need of them? demanded Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  See, and judge with your own eyes, said the scout, advancing toward the
Title:  eastern brow of the mountain, whither he beckoned for the whole party to
Title:  follow; if it was as easy to look into the heart of man as it is to spy out
Title:  the nakedness of Montcalm's camp from this spot, hypocrites would grow
Title:  scarce, and the cunning of a Mingo might prove a losing game, compared to
Title:  the honesty of a Delaware.
Title:  
Title:  When the travelers reached the verge of the precipices they saw, at a
Title:  glance, the truth of the scout's declaration, and the admirable foresight
Title:  with which he had led them to their commanding station.
Title:  
Title:  The mountain on which they stood, elevated perhaps a thousand feet in the
Title:  air, was a high cone that rose a little in advance of that range which
Title:  stretches for miles along the western shores of the lake, until meeting its
Title:  sisters miles beyond the water, it ran off toward the Canadas, in confused
Title:  and broken masses of rock, thinly sprinkled with evergreens. Immediately at
Title:  the feet of the party, the southern shore of the Horican swept in a broad
Title:  semicircle from mountain to mountain, marking a wide strand, that soon rose
Title:  into an uneven and somewhat elevated plain. To the north stretched the
Title:  limpid, and, as it appeared from that dizzy height, the narrow sheet of the
Title:  holy lake, indented with numberless bays, embellished by fantastic
Title:  headlands, and dotted with countless islands. At the distance of a few
Title:  leagues, the bed of the water became lost among mountains, or was wrapped in
Title:  the masses of vapor that came slowly rolling along their bosom, before a
Title:  light morning air. But a narrow opening between the crests of the hills
Title:  pointed out the passage by which they found their way still further north,
Title:  to spread their pure and ample sheets again, before pouring out their
Title:  tribute into the distant Champlain. To the shout stretched the defile, or
Title:  rather broken plain, so often mentioned. For several miles in this
Title:  direction, the mountains appeared reluctant to yield their dominion, but
Title:  within reach of the eye they diverged, and finally melted into the level and
Title:  sandy lands, across which we have accompanied our adventurers in their
Title:  double journey. Along both ranges of hills, which bounded the opposite sides
Title:  of the lake and valley, clouds of light vapor were rising in spiral wreaths
Title:  from the uninhabited woods, looking like the smoke of hidden cottages; or
Title:  rolled lazily down the declivities, to mingle with the fogs of the lower
Title:  land. A single, solitary, snow-white cloud floated above the valley, and
Title:  marked the spot beneath which lay the silent pool of the bloody pond.
Title:  
Title:  Directly on the shore of the lake, and nearer to its western than to its
Title:  eastern margin, lay the extensive earthen ramparts and low buildings of
Title:  William Henry. Two of the sweeping bastions appeared to rest on the water
Title:  which washed their bases, while a deep ditch and extensive morasses guarded
Title:  its other sides and angles. The land had been cleared of wood for a
Title:  reasonable distance around the work, but every other part of the scene lay
Title:  in the green livery of nature, except where the limpid water mellowed the
Title:  view, or the bold rocks thrust their black and naked heads above the
Title:  undulating outline of the mountain ranges. In its front might be seen the
Title:  scattered sentinels, who held a weary watch against their numerous foes; and
Title:  within the walls themselves, the travelers looked down upon men still drowsy
Title:  with a night of vigilance. Toward the southeast, but in immediate contact
Title:  with the fort, was an entrenched camp, posted on a rocky eminence, that
Title:  would have been far more eligible for the work itself, in which Hawkeye
Title:  pointed out the presence of those auxiliary regiments that had so recently
Title:  left the Hudson in their company. From the woods, a little further to the
Title:  south, rose numerous dark and lurid smokes, that were easily to be
Title:  distinguished from the purer exhalations of the springs, and which the scout
Title:  also showed to Heyward, as evidences that the enemy lay in force in that
Title:  direction.
Title:  
Title:  But the spectacle which most concerned the young soldier was on the western
Title:  bank of the lake, though quite near to its southern termination. On a strip
Title:  of land, which appeared from his stand too narrow to contain such an army,
Title:  but which, in truth, extended many hundreds of yards from the shores of the
Title:  Horican to the base of the mountain, were to be seen the white tents and
Title:  military engines of an encampment of ten thousand men. Batteries were
Title:  already thrown up in their front, and even while the spectators above them
Title:  were looking down, with such different emotions, on a scene which lay like a
Title:  map beneath their feet, the roar of artillery rose from the valley, and
Title:  passed off in thundering echoes along the eastern hills.
Title:  
Title:  Morning is just touching them below, said the deliberate and musing scout,
Title:  and the watchers have a mind to wake up the sleepers by the sound of cannon.
Title:  We are a few hours too late! Montcalm has already filled the woods with his
Title:  accursed Iroquois.
Title:  
Title:  The place is, indeed, invested, returned Duncan; but is there no expedient
Title:  by which we may enter? capture in the works would be far preferable to
Title:  falling again into the hands of roving Indians.
Title:  
Title:  See! exclaimed the scout, unconsciously directing the attention of Cora to
Title:  the quarters of her own father, how that shot has made the stones fly from
Title:  the side of the commandant's house! Ay! these Frenchers will pull it to
Title:  pieces faster than it was put together, solid and thick though it be!
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, I sicken at the sight of danger that I cannot share, said the
Title:  undaunted but anxious daughter. Let us go to Montcalm, and demand admission:
Title:  he dare not deny a child the boon.
Title:  
Title:  You would scarce find the tent of the Frenchman with the hair on your head;
Title:  said the blunt scout. If I had but one of the thousand boats which lie empty
Title:  along that shore, it might be done! Ha! here will soon be an end of the
Title:  firing, for yonder comes a fog that will turn day to night, and make an
Title:  Indian arrow more dangerous than a molded cannon. Now, if you are equal to
Title:  the work, and will follow, I will make a push; for I long to get down into
Title:  that camp, if it be only to scatter some Mingo dogs that I see lurking in
Title:  the skirts of yonder thicket of birch.
Title:  
Title:  We are equal, said Cora, firmly; on such an errand we will follow to any
Title:  danger.
Title:  
Title:  The scout turned to her with a smile of honest and cordial approbation, as
Title:  he answered:
Title:  
Title:  I would I had a thousand men, of brawny limbs and quick eyes, that feared
Title:  death as little as you! I'd send them jabbering Frenchers back into their
Title:  den again, afore the week was ended, howling like so many fettered hounds or
Title:  hungry wolves. But, sir, he added, turning from her to the rest of the
Title:  party, the fog comes rolling down so fast, we shall have but just the time
Title:  to meet it on the plain, and use it as a cover. Remember, if any accident
Title:  should befall me, to keep the air blowing on your left cheeks - or, rather,
Title:  follow the Mohicans; they'd scent their way, be it in day or be it at night.
Title:  
Title:  He then waved his hand for them to follow, and threw himself down the steep
Title:  declivity, with free, but careful footsteps. Heyward assisted the sisters to
Title:  descend, and in a few minutes they were all far down a mountain whose sides
Title:  they had climbed with so much toil and pain.
Title:  
Title:  The direction taken by Hawkeye soon brought the travelers to the level of
Title:  the plain, nearly opposite to a sally-port in the western curtain of the
Title:  fort, which lay itself at the distance of about half a mile from the point
Title:  where he halted to allow Duncan to come up with his charge. In their
Title:  eagerness, and favored by the nature of the ground, they had anticipated the
Title:  fog, which was rolling heavily down the lake, and it became necessary to
Title:  pause, until the mists had wrapped the camp of the enemy in their fleecy
Title:  mantle. The Mohicans profited by the delay, to steal out of the woods, and
Title:  to make a survey of surrounding objects. They were followed at a little
Title:  distance by the scout, with a view to profit early by their report, and to
Title:  obtain some faint knowledge for himself of the more immediate localities.
Title:  
Title:  In a very few moments he returned, his face reddened with vexation, while he
Title:  muttered his disappointment in words of no very gentle import.
Title:  
Title:  Here has the cunning Frenchman been posting a picket directly in our path,
Title:  he said; red-skins and whites; and we shall be as likely to fall into their
Title:  midst as to pass them in the fog!
Title:  
Title:  Cannot we make a circuit to avoid the danger, asked Heyward, and come into
Title:  our path again when it is passed?
Title:  
Title:  Who that once bends from the line of his march in a fog can tell when or how
Title:  to find it again! The mists of Horican are not like the curls from a
Title:  peace-pipe, or the smoke which settles above a mosquito fire.
Title:  
Title:  He was yet speaking, when a crashing sound was heard, and a cannon-ball
Title:  entered the thicket, striking the body of a sapling, and rebounding to the
Title:  earth, its force being much expended by previous resistance. The Indians
Title:  followed instantly like busy attendants on the terrible messenger, and Uncas
Title:  commenced speaking earnestly and with much action, in the Delaware tongue.
Title:  
Title:  It may be so, lad, muttered the scout, when he had ended; for desperate
Title:  fevers are not to be treated like a toothache. Come, then, the fog is
Title:  shutting in.
Title:  
Title:  Stop! cried Heyward; first explain your expectations.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis soon done, and a small hope it is; but it is better than nothing. This
Title:  shot that you see, added the scout, kicking the harmless iron with his foot,
Title:  has plowed the 'arth in its road from the fort, and we shall hunt for the
Title:  furrow it has made, when all other signs may fail. No more words, but
Title:  follow, or the fog may leave us in the middle of our path, a mark for both
Title:  armies to shoot at.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward perceiving that, in fact, a crisis had arrived, when acts were more
Title:  required than words, placed himself between the sisters, and drew them
Title:  swiftly forward, keeping the dim figure of their leader in his eye. It was
Title:  soon apparent that Hawkeye had not magnified the power of the fog, for
Title:  before they had proceeded twenty yards, it was difficult for the different
Title:  individuals of the party to distinguish each other in the vapor.
Title:  
Title:  They had made their little circuit to the left, and were already inclining
Title:  again toward the right, having, as Heyward thought, got over nearly half the
Title:  distance to the friendly works, when his ears were saluted with the fierce
Title:  summons, apparently within twenty feet of them, of:
Title:  
Title:  Qui va la?
Title:  
Title:  Push on! whispered the scout, once more bending to the left.
Title:  
Title:  Push on! repeated Heyward; when the summons was renewed by a dozen voices,
Title:  each of which seemed charged with menace.
Title:  
Title:  C'est moi, cried Duncan, dragging rather than leading those he supported
Title:  swiftly onward.
Title:  
Title:  Bete! - qui? - moi!
Title:  
Title:  Ami de la France.
Title:  
Title:  Tu m'as plus l'air d'un ennemi de la France; arrete ou pardieu je te ferai
Title:  ami du diable. Non! feu, camarades, feu!
Title:  
Title:  The order was instantly obeyed, and the fog was stirred by the explosion of
Title:  fifty muskets. Happily, the aim was bad, and the bullets cut the air in a
Title:  direction a little different from that taken by the fugitives; though still
Title:  so nigh them, that to the unpractised ears of David and the two females, it
Title:  appeared as if they whistled within a few inches of the organs. The outcry
Title:  was renewed, and the order, not only to fire again, but to pursue, was too
Title:  plainly audible. When Heyward briefly explained the meaning of the words
Title:  they heard, Hawkeye halted and spoke with quick decision and great firmness.
Title:  
Title:  Let us deliver our fire, he said; they will believe it a sortie, and give
Title:  way, or they will wait for reinforcements.
Title:  
Title:  The scheme was well conceived, but failed in its effects. The instant the
Title:  French heard the pieces, it seemed as if the plain was alive with men,
Title:  muskets rattling along its whole extent, from the shores of the lake to the
Title:  furthest boundary of the woods.
Title:  
Title:  We shall draw their entire army upon us, and bring on a general assault,
Title:  said Duncan: lead on, my friend, for your own life and ours.
Title:  
Title:  The scout seemed willing to comply; but, in the hurry of the moment, and in
Title:  the change of position, he had lost the direction. In vain he turned either
Title:  cheek toward the light air; they felt equally cool. In this dilemma, Uncas
Title:  lighted on the furrow of the cannon ball, where it had cut the ground in
Title:  three adjacent ant-hills.
Title:  
Title:  Give me the range! said Hawkeye, bending to catch a glimpse of the
Title:  direction, and then instantly moving onward.
Title:  
Title:  Cries, oaths, voices calling to each other, and the reports of muskets, were
Title:  now quick and incessant, and, apparently, on every side of them. Suddenly a
Title:  strong glare of light flashed across the scene, the fog rolled upward in
Title:  thick wreaths, and several cannons belched across the plain, and the roar
Title:  was thrown heavily back from the bellowing echoes of the mountain.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis from the fort! exclaimed Hawkeye, turning short on his tracks; and we,
Title:  like stricken fools, were rushing to the woods, under the very knives of the
Title:  Maquas.
Title:  
Title:  The instant their mistake was rectified, the whole party retraced the error
Title:  with the utmost diligence. Duncan willingly relinquished the support of Cora
Title:  to the arm of Uncas and Cora as readily accepted the welcome assistance.
Title:  Men, hot and angry in pursuit, were evidently on their footsteps, and each
Title:  instant threatened their capture, if not their destruction.
Title:  
Title:  Point de quartier aux coquins! cried an eager pursuer, who seemed to direct
Title:  the operations of the enemy.
Title:  
Title:  Stand firm, and be ready, my gallant Sixtieths! suddenly exclaimed a voice
Title:  above them; wait to see the enemy, fire low and sweep the glacis.
Title:  
Title:  Father! father! exclaimed a piercing cry from out the mist: it is I! Alice!
Title:  thy own Elsie! Spare, oh! save your daughters!
Title:  
Title:  Hold! shouted the former speaker, in the awful tones of parental agony, the
Title:  sound reaching even to the woods, and rolling back in solemn echo. 'Tis she!
Title:  God has restored me to my children! Throw open the sally-port; to the field,
Title:  Sixtieths, to the field; pull not a trigger, lest ye kill my lambs! Drive
Title:  off these dogs of France with your steel.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan heard the grating of the rusty hinges, and darting to the spot,
Title:  directed by the sound, he met a long line of dark red warriors, passing
Title:  swiftly toward the glacis. He knew them for his own battalion of the Royal
Title:  Americans, and flying to their head, soon swept every trace of his pursuers
Title:  from before the works.
Title:  
Title:  For an instant, Cora and Alice had stood trembling and bewildered by this
Title:  unexpected desertion; but before either had leisure for speech, or even
Title:  thought, an officer of gigantic frame, whose locks were bleached with years
Title:  and service, but whose air of military grandeur had been rather softened
Title:  than destroyed by time, rushed out of the body of mist, and folded them to
Title:  his bosom, while large scalding tears rolled down his pale and wrinkled
Title:  cheeks, and he exclaimed, in the peculiar accent of Scotland:
Title:  
Title:  For this I thank thee, Lord! Let danger come as it will, thy servant is now
Title:  prepared!
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 Baron Dieskau, a German, in the service of France. A few years previously
Title:  to the period of the tale, this officer was defeated by Sir William Johnson,
Title:  of Johnstown, New York, on the shores of Lake George.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 15
Title:  
Title:       Then go we in, to know his embassy;
Title:       Which I could, with ready guess, declare,
Title:       Before the Frenchmen speak a word of it.
Title:  
Title:                                                            KING HENRY V
Title:  
Title:  A few succeeding days were passed amid the privations, the uproar, and the
Title:  dangers of the siege, which was vigorously pressed by a power, against whose
Title:  approaches Munro possessed no competent means of resistance. It appeared as
Title:  if Webb, with his army, which lay slumbering on the banks of the Hudson, had
Title:  utterly forgotten the strait to which his countrymen were reduced. Montcalm
Title:  had filled the woods of the portage with his savages, every yell and whoop
Title:  from whom rang through the British encampment, chilling the hearts of men
Title:  who were already but too much disposed to magnify the danger.
Title:  
Title:  Not so, however, with the besieged. Animated by the words, and stimulated by
Title:  the examples of their leaders, they had found their courage, and maintained
Title:  their ancient reputation, with a zeal that did justice to the stern
Title:  character of their commander. As if satisfied with the toil of marching
Title:  through the wilderness to encounter his enemy, the French general, though of
Title:  approved skill, had neglected to seize the adjacent mountains; whence the
Title:  besieged might have been exterminated with impunity, and which, in the more
Title:  modern warfare of the country, would not have been neglected for a single
Title:  hour. This sort of contempt for eminences, or rather dread of the labor of
Title:  ascending them, might have been termed the besetting weakness of the warfare
Title:  of the period. It originated in the simplicity of the Indian contests, in
Title:  which, from the nature of the combats, and the density of the forests,
Title:  fortresses were rare, and artillery next to useless. The carelessness
Title:  engendered by these usages descended even to the war of the Revolution and
Title:  lost the States the important fortress of Ticonderoga opening a way for the
Title:  army of Burgoyne into what was then the bosom of the country. We look back
Title:  at this ignorance, or infatuation, whichever it may be called, with wonder,
Title:  knowing that the neglect of an eminence, whose difficultires, like those of
Title:  Mount Defiance, have been so greatly exaggerated, would, at the present
Title:  time, prove fatal to the reputation of the engineer who had planned the
Title:  works at their base, or to that of the general whose lot it was to defend
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  The tourist, the valetudinarian, or the amateur of the beauties of nature,
Title:  who, in the train of his four-in-hand, now rolls through the scenes we have
Title:  attempted to describe, in quest of information, health, or pleasure, or
Title:  floats steadily toward his object on those artificial waters which have
Title:  sprung up under the administration of a statesman1 who has dared to stake
Title:  his political character on the hazardous issue, is not to suppose that his
Title:  ancestors traversed those hills, or struggled with the same currents with
Title:  equal facility. The transportation of a single heavy gun was often
Title:  considered equal to a victory gained; if happily, the difficulties of the
Title:  passage had not so far separated it from its necessary concomitant, the
Title:  ammunition, as to render it no more than a useless tube of unwieldy iron.
Title:  
Title:  The evils of this state of things pressed heavily on the fortunes of the
Title:  resolute Scotsman who now defended William Henry. Though his adversary
Title:  neglected the hills, he had planted his batteries with judgment on the
Title:  plain, and caused them to be served with vigor and skill. Against this
Title:  assualt, the besieged could only oppose the imperfect and hasty preparations
Title:  of a fortress in the wilderness.
Title:  
Title:  It was in the afternoon of the fifth day of the siege, and the fourth of his
Title:  own service in it, that Major Heyward profited by a parley that had just
Title:  been beaten, by repairing to the ramparts of one of the water bastions, to
Title:  breathe the cool air from the lake, and to take a survey of the progress of
Title:  the siege. He was alone, if the solitary sentinel who paced the mound be
Title:  excepted; for the artillerists had hastened also to profit by the temporary
Title:  suspension of their arduous duties. The evening was delightfully calm, and
Title:  the light air from the limpid water fresh and soothing. It seemed as if,
Title:  with the termination of the roar of artillery and the plunging of shot,
Title:  nature had also seized the moment to assume her mildest and most captivating
Title:  form. The sun poured down his parting glory on the scene, without the
Title:  oppression of those fierce rays that belong to the climate and the season.
Title:  The mountains looked green, and fresh, and lovely, tempered with the milder
Title:  light, or softened in shadow, as thin vapors floated between them and the
Title:  sun. The numerous islands rested on the bosom of the Horican, some low and
Title:  sunken, as if embedded in the waters, and others appearing to hover about
Title:  the element, in little hillocks of green velvet; among which the fishermen
Title:  of the beleaguering army peacefully rowed their skiffs, or floated at rest
Title:  on the glassy mirror in quiet pursuit of their employment.
Title:  
Title:  The scene was at once animated and still. All that pertained to nature was
Title:  sweet, or simply grand; while those parts which depended on the temper and
Title:  movements of man were lively and playful.
Title:  
Title:  Two little spotless flags were abroad, the one on a salient angle of the
Title:  fort, and the other on the advanced battery of the besiegers; emblems of the
Title:  truth which existed, not only to the acts, but it would seem, also, to the
Title:  enmity of the combatants.
Title:  
Title:  Behind these again swung, heavily opening and closing in silken folds, the
Title:  rival standards of England and France.
Title:  
Title:  A hundred gay and thoughtless young Frenchmen were drawing a net to the
Title:  pebbly beach, within dangerous proximity to the sullen but silent cannon of
Title:  the fort, while the eastern mountain was sending back the loud shouts and
Title:  gay merriment that attended their sport. Some were rushing eagerly to enjoy
Title:  the aquatic games of the lake, and others were already toiling their way up
Title:  the neighboring hills, with the restless curiosity of their nation. To all
Title:  these sports and pursuits, those of the enemy who watched the besieged, and
Title:  the besieged themselves, were, however, merely the idle though sympathizing
Title:  spectators. Here and there a picket had, indeed, raised a song, or mingled
Title:  in a dance, which had drawn the dusky savages around them, from their lairs
Title:  in the forest. In short, everything wore rather the appearance of a day of
Title:  pleasure, than of an hour stolen from the dangers and toil of a bloody and
Title:  vindictive warfare.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan had stood in a musing attitude, contemplating this scene a few
Title:  minutes, when his eyes were directed to the glacis in front of the
Title:  sally-port already mentioned, by the sounds of approaching footsteps. He
Title:  walked to an angle of the bastion, and beheld the scout advancing, under the
Title:  custody of a French officer, to the body of the fort. The countenance of
Title:  Hawkeye was haggard and careworn, and his air dejected, as though he felt
Title:  the deepest degradation at having fallen into the power of his enemies. He
Title:  was without his favorite weapon, and his arms were even bound behind him
Title:  with thongs, made of the skin of a deer. The arrival of flags to cover the
Title:  messengers of summons, had occurred so often of late, that when Heyward
Title:  first threw his careless glance on this group, he expected to see another of
Title:  the officers of the enemy, charged with a similar office but the instant he
Title:  recognized the tall person and still sturdy though downcast features of his
Title:  friend, the woodsman, he started with surprise, and turned to descend from
Title:  the bastion into the bosom of the work.
Title:  
Title:  The sounds of other voices, however, caught his attention, and for a moment
Title:  caused him to forget his purpose. At the inner angle of the mound he met the
Title:  sisters, walking along the parapet, in search, like himself, of air and
Title:  relief from confinement. They had not met from that painful moment when he
Title:  deserted them on the plain, only to assure their safety. He had parted from
Title:  them worn with care, and jaded with fatigue; he now saw them refreshed and
Title:  blooming, though timid and anxious. Under such an inducement it will cause
Title:  no surprise that the young man lost sight for a time, of other objects in
Title:  order to address them. He was, however, anticipated by the voice of the
Title:  ingenuous and youthful Alice.
Title:  
Title:  Ah! thou tyrant! thou recreant knight! he who abandons his damsels in the
Title:  very lists, she cried; here have we been days, nay, ages, expecting you at
Title:  our feet, imploring mercy and forgetfulness of your craven backsliding, or I
Title:  should rather say, backrunning - for verily you fled in the manner that no
Title:  striken deer, as our worthy friend the scout would say, could equal!
Title:  
Title:  You know that Alice means our thanks and our blessings, added the graver and
Title:  more thoughtful Cora. In truth, we have a little wonder why you should so
Title:  rigidly absent yourself from a place where the gratitude of the daughters
Title:  might receive the support of a parent's thanks.
Title:  
Title:  Your father himself could tell you, that, though absent from your presence,
Title:  I have not been altogether forgetful of your safety, returned the young man;
Title:  the mastery of yonder village of huts, pointing to the neighboring
Title:  entrenched camp, has been keenly disputed; and he who holds it is sure to be
Title:  possessed of this fort, and that which it contains. My days and nights have
Title:  all been passed there since we separated, because I thought that duty called
Title:  me thither. But, he added, with an air of chagrin, which he endeavored,
Title:  though unsuccessfully, to conceal, had I been aware that what I then
Title:  believed a soldier's conduct could be so construed, shame would have been
Title:  added to the list of reasons.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward! Duncan! exclaimed Alice, bending forward to read his half-averted
Title:  countenance, until a lock of her golden hair rested on her flushed cheek,
Title:  and nearly concealed the tear that had started to her eye; did I think this
Title:  idle tongue of mine had pained you, I would silence it forever. Cora can
Title:  say, if Cora would, how justly we have prized your services, and how deep -
Title:  I had almost said, how fervent - is our gratitude. And will Cora attest the
Title:  truth of this? cried Duncan, suffering the cloud to be chased from his
Title:  countenance by a smile of open pleasure. What says our graver sister? Will
Title:  she find an excuse for the neglect of the knight in the duty of a soldier?
Title:  
Title:  Cora made no immediate answer, but turned her face toward the water, as if
Title:  looking on the sheet of the Horican. When she did bend her dark eyes on the
Title:  young man, they were yet filled with an expression of anguish that at once
Title:  drove every thought but that of kind solicitude from his mind.
Title:  
Title:  You are not well, dearest Miss Munro! he exclaimed; we have trifled while
Title:  you are in suffering!
Title:  
Title:  'Tis nothing, she answered, refusing his support with feminine reserve. That
Title:  I cannot see the sunny side of the picture of life, like this artless but
Title:  ardent enthusiast, she added, laying her hand lightly, but affectionately,
Title:  on the arm of her sister, is the penalty of experience, and, perhaps, the
Title:  misfortune of my nature. See, she continued, as if determined to shake off
Title:  infirmity, in a sense of duty; look around you, Major Heyward, and tell me
Title:  what a prospect is this for the daughter of a soldier whose greatest
Title:  happiness is his honor and his military renown.
Title:  
Title:  Neither ought nor shall be tarnished by circumstances over which he has had
Title:  no control, Duncan warmly replied. But your words recall me to my own duty.
Title:  I go now to your gallant father, to hear his determination in matters of the
Title:  last moment to the defense. God bless you in every fortune, noble - Cora - I
Title:  may and must call you. She frankly gave him her hand, though her lip
Title:  quivered, and her cheeks gradually became of ashly palness. In every
Title:  fortune, I know you will be an ornament and honor to your sex. Alice, adieu
Title:  - his voice changed from admiration to tenderness - adieu, Alice; we shall
Title:  soon meet again; as conquerors, I trust, and amid rejoicings!
Title:  
Title:  Without waiting for an answer from either, the young man threw himself down
Title:  the grassy steps of the bastion, and moving rapidly across the parade, he
Title:  was quickly in the presence of their father. Munro was pacing his narrow
Title:  apartment with a disturbed air and gigantic strides as Duncan entered.
Title:  
Title:  You have anticipated my wishes, Major Heyward, he said; I was about to
Title:  request this favor.
Title:  
Title:  I am sorry to see, sir, that the messenger I so warmly recommended has
Title:  returned in custody of the French! I hope there is no reason to distrust his
Title:  fidelity?
Title:  
Title:  The fidelity of The Long Rifle is well known to me, returned Munro, and is
Title:  above suspicion; though his usual good fortune seems, at last, to have
Title:  failed. Montcalm has got him, and with the accursed politeness of his
Title:  nation, he has sent him in with a doleful tale, of knowing how I valued the
Title:  fellow, he could not think of retaining him. A Jesuitical way that, Major
Title:  Duncan Heyward, of telling a man of his misfortunes!
Title:  
Title:  But the general and his succor?
Title:  
Title:  Did ye look to the south as ye entered, and could ye not see them? said the
Title:  old soldier, laughting bitterly.
Title:  
Title:  Hoot! hoot! you're an impatient boy, sir, and cannot give the gentlemen
Title:  leisure for their march!
Title:  
Title:  They are coming, then? The scout has said as much?
Title:  
Title:  When? and by what path? for the dunce has omitted to tell me this. There is
Title:  a letter, it would seem, too; and that is the only agreeable part of the
Title:  matter. For the customary attentions of your Marquis of Montcalm - I warrant
Title:  me, Duncan, that he of Lothian would buy a dozen such marquisates - but if
Title:  the news of the letter were bad, the gentility of this French monsieur would
Title:  certainly compel him to let us know it.
Title:  
Title:  He keeps the letter, then, while he releases the messenger?
Title:  
Title:  Ay, that does he, and all for the sake of what you call your bonhommie I
Title:  would venture, if the truth was known, the fellow's grandfather taught the
Title:  noble science of dancing.
Title:  
Title:  But what says the scout? he has eyes and ears, and a tongue. What verbal
Title:  report does he make?
Title:  
Title:  Oh! sir, he is not wanting in natural organs, and he is free to tell all
Title:  that he has seen and heard. The whole amount is this; there is a fort of his
Title:  majesty's on the banks of the Hudson, called Edward, in honor of his
Title:  gracious highness of York, you'll know; and it is well filled with armed
Title:  men, as such a work should be.
Title:  
Title:  But was there no movement, no signs of any intention to advance to our
Title:  relief?
Title:  
Title:  There were the morning and evening parades; and when one of the provincial
Title:  loons - you'll know, Dunca, you're half a Scotsman yourself - when one of
Title:  them dropped his powder over his porretch, if it touched the coals, it just
Title:  burned! Then, suddenly changing his bitter, ironical manner, to one more
Title:  grave and thoughtful, he continued: and yet there might, and must be,
Title:  something in that letter which it would be well to know!
Title:  
Title:  Our decision should be speedy, said Duncan, gladly availing himself of this
Title:  change of humor, to press the more important objects of their interview; I
Title:  cannot conceal from you, sir, that the camp will not be much longer tenable;
Title:  and I am sorry to add, that things appear no better in the fort; more than
Title:  half the guns are bursted.
Title:  
Title:  And how should it be otherwise? Some were fished from the bottom of the
Title:  lake; some have been rusting in woods since the discovery of the country;
Title:  and some were never guns at all - mere privateersmen's playthings! Do you
Title:  think, sir, you can have Woolwich Warren in the midst of a wilderness, three
Title:  thousand miles from Great Britain?
Title:  
Title:  The walls are crumbling about our ears, and provisions begin to fail us,
Title:  continued Heyward, without regarding the new burst of indignation; even the
Title:  men show signs of discontent and alarm.
Title:  
Title:  Major Heyward, said Munro, turning to his youthful associate with the
Title:  dignity of his years and superior rank; I should have served his majesty for
Title:  half a century, and earned these gray hairs in vain, were I ignorant of all
Title:  you say, and of the pressing nature of our circumstances; still, there is
Title:  everything due to the honor of the king's arms, and something to ourselves.
Title:  While there is hope of succor, this fortress will I defend, though it be to
Title:  be done with pebbles gathered on the lake shore. It is a sight of the
Title:  letter, therefore, that we want, that we may know the intentions of the man
Title:  the earl of Loudon has left among us as his substitute.
Title:  
Title:  And can I be of service in the matter?
Title:  
Title:  Sir, you can; the marquis of Montcalm has, in addition to his other
Title:  civilities, invited me to a personal interview between the works and his own
Title:  camp; in order, as he says, to impart some additional information. Now, I
Title:  think it would not be wise to show any undue solicitude to meet him, and I
Title:  would employ you, an officer of rank, as my substitute; for it would but ill
Title:  comport with the honor of Scotland to let it be said one of her gentlemen
Title:  was outdone in civility by a native of any other country on earth.
Title:  
Title:  Without assuming the supererogatory task of entering into a discussion of
Title:  the comparative merits of national courtesy, Duncan cheerfully assented to
Title:  supply the place of the veteran in the approaching interview. A long
Title:  andconfidential communication now succeeded, during which the young man
Title:  received some additional insight into his duty, from the experience and
Title:  native acuteness of his commander, and then the former took his leave.
Title:  
Title:  As Duncan could only act as the representative of the commandant of the
Title:  fort, the ceremonies which should have accompanied a meeting between the
Title:  heads of the adverse forces were, of course, dispensed with. The truce still
Title:  existed, and with a roll and beat of the drum, and covered by a little white
Title:  flag, Duncan left the sally-port, within ten minutes after his instructions
Title:  were ended. He was received by the French officer in advance with the usual
Title:  formalities, and immediately accompanied to a distant marquee of the
Title:  renowned soldier who led the forces of France.
Title:  
Title:  The general of the enemy received the youthful messenger, surrounded by his
Title:  principal officers, and by a swarthy band of the native chiefs, who had
Title:  followed him to the field, with the warriors of their several tribes.
Title:  Heyward paused short, when, in glancing his eyes rapidly over the dark group
Title:  of the latter, he beheld the malignant countenance of Magua, regarding him
Title:  with the calm but sullen attention which marked the expression of that
Title:  subtle savage. A slight exclamation of surprise even burst from the lips of
Title:  the young man, but instantly, recollecting his errand, and the presence in
Title:  which he stood, he suppressed every appearance of emotion, and turned to the
Title:  hostile leader, who had already advanced a step to receive him.
Title:  
Title:  The marquis of Montcalm was, at the period of which we write, in the flower
Title:  of his age, and, it may be added, in the zenith of his fortunes. But even in
Title:  that enviable situation, he was affable, and distinguished as much for his
Title:  attention to the forms of courtesy, as for that chivalrous courage which,
Title:  only two short years afterward, induced him to throw away his life on the
Title:  plains of Abraham. Duncan, in turning his eyes from the malign expression of
Title:  Magua, suffered them to rest with pleasure on the smiling and polished
Title:  features, and the noble military air, of the French general.
Title:  
Title:  Monsieur, said the latter, j'ai beaucoup de plaisir a - bah! - ou est cet
Title:  interprete?
Title:  
Title:  Je crois, monsieur, qu'il ne sear pas necessaire, Heyward modestly replied;
Title:  je parle un peu francais.
Title:  
Title:  Ah! j'en suis bien aise, said Montcalm, taking Duncan familiarly by the arm,
Title:  and leading him deep into the marquee, a little out of earshot; je deteste
Title:  ces fripons-la; on ne sait jamais sur quel pie on est avec eux. Eh, bien!
Title:  monsieur, he continued still speaking in French; though I should have been
Title:  proud of receiving your commandant, I am very happy that he has seen proper
Title:  to employ an officer so distinguished, and who, I am sure, is so amiable, as
Title:  yourself.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan bowed low, pleased with the compliment, in spite of a most heroic
Title:  determination to suffer no artifice to allure him into forgetfulness of the
Title:  interest of his prince; and Montcalm, after a pause of a moment, as if to
Title:  collect his thoughts, proceeded:
Title:  
Title:  Your commandant is a brave man, and well qualified to repel my assault.
Title:  Mais, monsieur, is it not time to begin to take more counsel of humanity,
Title:  and less of your courage? The one as strongly characterizes the hero as the
Title:  other.
Title:  
Title:  We consider the qualities as inseparable, returned Duncan, smiling; but
Title:  while we find in the vigor of your excellency every motive to stimulate the
Title:  one, we can, as yet, see no particular call for the exercise of the other.
Title:  
Title:  Montcalm, in his turn, slightly bowed, but it was with the air of a man too
Title:  practised to remember the language of flattery. After musing a moment, he
Title:  added:
Title:  
Title:  It is possible my glasses have deceived me, and that your works resist our
Title:  cannon better than I had supposed. You know our force?
Title:  
Title:  Our accounts vary, said Duncan, carelessly; the highest, however, has not
Title:  exceeded twenty thousand men.
Title:  
Title:  The Frenchman bit his lip, and fastened his eyes keenly on the other as if
Title:  to read his thoughts; then, with a readiness peculiar to himself, he
Title:  continued, as if assenting to the truth of an enumeration which quite
Title:  doubled his army:
Title:  
Title:  It is a poor compliment to the vigilance of us soldiers, monsieur, that, do
Title:  what we will, we never can conceal our numbers. If it were to be done at
Title:  all, one would believe it might succeed in these woods. Though you think it
Title:  too soon to listen to the calls of humanity, he added, smiling archly, I may
Title:  be permitted to believe that gallantry is not forgotten by one so young as
Title:  yourself. The daughters of the commandant, I learn, have passed into the
Title:  fort since it was invested?
Title:  
Title:  It is true, monsieur; but, so far from weakening our efforts, they set us an
Title:  example of courage in their own fortitude. Were nothing but resolution
Title:  necessary to repel so accomplished a soldier as M. de Montcalm, I would
Title:  gladly trust the defense of William Henry to the elder of those ladies.
Title:  
Title:  We have a wise ordinance in our Salique laws, which says, The crown of
Title:  France shall never degrade the lance to the distaff, said Montcalm, dryly,
Title:  and with a little hauteur; but instantly adding, with his former frank and
Title:  easy air: as all the nobler qualities are hereditary, I can easily credit
Title:  you; though, as I said before, courage has its limits, and humanity must not
Title:  be forgotten. I trust, monsieur, you come authorized to treat for the
Title:  surrender of the place?
Title:  
Title:  Has your excellency found our defense so feeble as to believe the measure
Title:  necessary?
Title:  
Title:  I should be sorry to have the defense protracted in such a manner as to
Title:  irritate my red friends there, continued Montcalm, glancing his eyes at the
Title:  group of grave and attentive Indians, without attending to the other's
Title:  questions; I find it difficult, even now, to limit them to the usages of
Title:  war.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward was silent; for a painful recollection of the dangers he had so
Title:  recently escaped came over his mind, and recalled the images of those
Title:  defenseless beings who had shared in all his sufferings.
Title:  
Title:  Ces messieurs-la, said Montcalm, following up the advantage which he
Title:  conceived he had gained, are most formidable when baffled; and it is
Title:  unnecessary to tell you with what difficulty they are restrained in their
Title:  anger. Eh bien, monsieur! shall we speak of the terms?
Title:  
Title:  I fear your excellency has been deceived as to the strength of William
Title:  Henry, and the resources of its garrison!
Title:  
Title:  I have not sat down before Quebec, but an earthen work, that is defended by
Title:  twenty-three hundred gallant men, was the laconic reply.
Title:  
Title:  Our mounds are earthen, certainly - nor are they seated on the rocks of Cape
Title:  Diamond; but they stand on that shore which proved so destructive to Dieskau
Title:  and his army. There is also a powerful force within a few hours' march of
Title:  us, which we account upon as a part of our means.
Title:  
Title:  Some six or eight thousand men, returned Montcalm, with much apparent
Title:  indifference, whom their leader wisely judges to be safer in their works
Title:  than in the field.
Title:  
Title:  It was now Heyward's turn to bite his lip with vexation as the other so
Title:  coolly alluded to a force which the young man knew to be overrated. Both
Title:  mused a little while in silence, when Montcalm renewed the conversation, in
Title:  a way that showed he believed the visit of his guest was solely to propose
Title:  terms of capitulation. On the other hand, Heyward began to throw sundry
Title:  inducements in the way of the French general, to betray the discoveries he
Title:  had made through the intercepted letter. The artifice of neither, however,
Title:  succeeded; and after a protracted and fruitless interview, Duncan took his
Title:  leave, favorably impressed with an opinion of the courtesy and talents of
Title:  the enemy's captain, but as ignorant of what he came to learn as when he
Title:  arrived. Montcalm followed him as far as the entrance of the marquee,
Title:  renewing his invitations to the commandant of the fort to give him an
Title:  immediate meeting in the open ground between the two armies.
Title:  
Title:  There they separated, and Duncan returned to the advanced post of the
Title:  French, accompanied as before; whence he instantly proceeded to the fort,
Title:  and to the quarters of his own commander.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 Evidently the late De Witt Clinton, who died governor of New York in 1828.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 16
Title:  
Title:       Edgar: Before you fight the battle ope this letter.
Title:  
Title:                                                                    LEAR
Title:  
Title:  Major Heyward found Munro attended only by his daughters. Alice sat upon his
Title:  knee, parting the gray hairs on the forehead of the old man with her
Title:  delicate fingers; and whenever he affected to frown on her trifling,
Title:  appeasing his assumed anger by pressing her ruby lips fondly on his wrinkled
Title:  brow. Cora was seated nigh them, a calm and amused looker-on; regarding the
Title:  wayward movements of her more youthful sister with that species of maternal
Title:  fondness which characterized her love for Alice. Not only the dangers
Title:  through which they had passed, but those which still impended above them,
Title:  appeared to be momentarily forgotten, in the soothing indulgence of such a
Title:  family meeting. It seemed as if they had profited by the short truce, to
Title:  devote an instant to the purest and best affection; the daughters forgetting
Title:  their fears, and the veteran his cares, in the security of the moment. Of
Title:  this scene, Duncan, who, in his eagerness to report his arrival, had entered
Title:  unannounced, stood many moments an unobserved and a delighted spectator. But
Title:  the quick and dancing eyes of Alice soon caught a glimpse of his figure
Title:  reflected from a glass, and she sprang blushing from her father's knee,
Title:  exclaiming aloud:
Title:  
Title:  Major Heyward!
Title:  
Title:  What of the lad? demanded her father; I have sent him to crack a little with
Title:  the Frenchman. Ha, sir, you are young, and you're nimble! Away with you, ye
Title:  baggage; as if there were not troubles enough for a soldier, without having
Title:  his camp filled with such prattling hussies as yourself!
Title:  
Title:  Alice laughingly followed her sister, who instantly led the way from an
Title:  apartment where she perceived their presence was no longer desirable. Munro,
Title:  instead of demanding the result of the young man's mission, paced the room
Title:  for a few moments, with his hands behind his back, and his head inclined
Title:  toward the floor, like a man lost in thought. At length he raised his eyes,
Title:  glistening with a father's fondness, and exclaimed:
Title:  
Title:  They are a pair of excellent girls, Heyward, and such as any one may boast
Title:  of.
Title:  
Title:  You are not now to learn my opinion of your daughters, Colonel Munro.
Title:  
Title:  True, lad, true, interrupted the impatient old man; you were about opening
Title:  your mind more fully on that matter the day you got in, but I did not think
Title:  it becoming in an old soldier to be talking of nuptial blessings and wedding
Title:  jokes when the enemies of his king were likely to be unbidden guests at the
Title:  feast. But I was wrong, Duncan, boy, I was wrong there; and I am now ready
Title:  to hear what you have to say.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding the pleasure your assurance gives me, dear sir, I have just
Title:  now, a message from Montcalm - -
Title:  
Title:  Let the Frenchman and all his host go to the devil, sir! exclaimed the hasty
Title:  veteran. He is not yet master of William Henry, nor shall he ever be,
Title:  provided Webb proves himself the man he should. No, sir, thank Heaven we are
Title:  not yet in such a strait that it can be said Munro is too much pressed to
Title:  discharge the little domestic duties of his own family. Your mother was the
Title:  only child of my bosom friend, Duncan; and I'll just give you a hearing,
Title:  though all the knights of St. Louis were in a body at the sally-port, with
Title:  the French saint at their head, crying to speak a word under favor. A pretty
Title:  degree of knighthood, sir, is that which can be bought with sugar hogsheads!
Title:  and then your twopenny marquisates. The thistle is the order for dignity and
Title:  antiquity; the veritable nemo me impune lacessit of chivalry. Ye had
Title:  ancestors in that degree, Duncan, and they were an ornamnet to the nobles of
Title:  Scotland.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, who perceived that his superior took a malicious pleasure in
Title:  exhibiting his contempt for the message of the French general, was fain to
Title:  humor a spleen that he knew would be short-lived; he therefore, replied with
Title:  as much indifference as he could assume on such a subject:
Title:  
Title:  My request, as you know, sir, went so far as to presume to the honor of
Title:  being your son.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, boy, you found words to make yourself very plainly comprehended. But,
Title:  let me ask ye, sir, have you been as intelligible to the girl?
Title:  
Title:  On my honor, no, exclaimed Duncan, warmly; there would have been an abuse of
Title:  a confided trust, had I taken advantage of my situation for such a purpose.
Title:  
Title:  Your notions are those of a gentleman, Major Heyward, and well enough in
Title:  their place. But Cora Munro is a maiden too discreet, and of a mind too
Title:  elevated and improved, to need the guardianship even of a father.
Title:  
Title:  Cora!
Title:  
Title:  Ay - Cora! we are talking of your pretensions to Miss Munro, are we not,
Title:  sir?
Title:  
Title:  I - I - I was not conscious of having mentioned her name, said Duncan,
Title:  stammering.
Title:  
Title:  And to marry whom, then, did you wish my consent, Major Heyward? demanded
Title:  the old soldier, erecting himself in the dignity of offended feeling.
Title:  
Title:  You have another, and not less lovely child.
Title:  
Title:  Alice! exclaimed the father, in an astonishment equal to that with which
Title:  Duncan had just repeated the name of her sister.
Title:  
Title:  Such was the direction of my wishes, sir.
Title:  
Title:  The young man awaited in silence the result of the extraordinary effect
Title:  produced by a communication, which, as it now appeared, was so unexpected.
Title:  For several minutes Munro paced the chamber with long and rapid strides, his
Title:  rigid features working convulsively, and every faculty seemingly absorbed in
Title:  the musings of his own mind. At length, he paused directly in front of
Title:  Heyward, and riveting his eyes upon those of the other, he said, with a lip
Title:  that quivered violently:
Title:  
Title:  Duncan Heyward, I have loved you for the sake of him whose blood is in your
Title:  veins; I have loved you for your own good qualities; and I have loved you,
Title:  because I thought you would contribute to the happiness of my child. But all
Title:  this love would turn to hatred, were I assured that what I so much apprehend
Title:  is true.
Title:  
Title:  God forbid that any act or thought of mine should lead to such a change!
Title:  exclaimed the young man, whose eye never quailed under the penetrating look
Title:  it encountered. Without adverting to the impossibility of the other's
Title:  comprehending those feelings which were hid in his own bosom, Munro suffered
Title:  himself to be appeased by the unaltered countenance he met, and with a voice
Title:  sensibly softened, he continued:
Title:  
Title:  You would be my son, Duncan, and you're ignorant of the history of the man
Title:  you wish to call your father. Sit ye down, young man, and I will open to you
Title:  the wounds of a seared heart, in as few words as may be suitable.
Title:  
Title:  By this time, the message of Montcalm was as much forgotten by him who bore
Title:  it as by the man for whose ears it was intended. Each drew a chair, and
Title:  while the veteran communed a few moments with his own thoughts, apparently
Title:  in sadness, the youth suppressed his impatience in a look and attitude of
Title:  respectful attention. At length, the former spoke:
Title:  
Title:  You'll know, already, Major Heyward, that my family was both ancient and
Title:  honorable, commenced the Scotsman; though it might not altogether be endowed
Title:  with that amount of wealth that should correspond with its degree. I was,
Title:  maybe, such an one as yourself when I plighted my faith to Alice Graham, the
Title:  only child of a neighboring laird of some estate. But the connection was
Title:  disagreeable to her father, on more accounts than my poverty. I did,
Title:  therefore, what an honest man should - restored the maiden her troth, and
Title:  departed the country in the service of my king. I had seen many regions, and
Title:  had shed much blood in different lands, before duty called me to the islands
Title:  of the West Indies. There it was my lot to form a connection with one who in
Title:  time became my wife, and the mother of Cora. She was the daughter of a
Title:  gentleman of those isles, by a lady whose misfortune it was, if you will,
Title:  said the old man, proudly, to be descended, remotely, from that unfortunate
Title:  class who are so basely enslaved to administer to the wants of a luxurious
Title:  people. Ay, sir, that is a curse, entailed on Scotland by her unnatural
Title:  union with a foreign and trading people. But could I find a man among them
Title:  who would dare to reflect on my child, he should feel the weight of a
Title:  father's anger! Ha! Major Heyward, you are yourself born at the south, where
Title:  these unfortunate beings are considered of a race inferior to your own.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis most unfortunately true, sir, said Duncan, unable any longer to prevent
Title:  his eyes from sinking to the floor in embarrassment.
Title:  
Title:  And you cast it on my child as a reproach! You scorn to mingle the blood of
Title:  the Heywards with one so degraded - lovely and virtuous though she be?
Title:  fiercely demanded the jealous parent.
Title:  
Title:  Heaven protect me from a prejudice so unworthy of my reason! returned
Title:  Duncan, at the same time conscious of such a feeling, and that as deeply
Title:  rooted as if it had been ingrafted in his nature. The sweetness, the beauty,
Title:  the witchery of your younger daughter, Colonel Munro, might explain my
Title:  motives without imputing to me this injustice.
Title:  
Title:  Ye are right, sir, returned the old man, again changing his tones to those
Title:  of gentleness, or rather softness; the girl is the image of what her mother
Title:  was at her years, and before she had become acquainted with grief. When
Title:  death deprived me of my wife I returned to Scotland, enriched by the
Title:  marriage; and, would you think it, Duncan! the suffering angel had remained
Title:  in the heartless state of celibacy twenty long years, and that for the sake
Title:  of a man who could forget her! She did more, sir; she overlooked my want of
Title:  faith, and, all difficulties being now removed, she took me for her husband.
Title:  
Title:  And became the mother of Alice? exclaimed Duncan, with an eagerness that
Title:  might have proved dangerous at a moment when the thoughts of Munro were less
Title:  occupied that at present.
Title:  
Title:  She did, indeed, said the old man, and dearly did she pay for the blessing
Title:  she bestowed. But she is a saint in heaven, sir; and it ill becomes one
Title:  whose foot rests on the grave to mourn a lot so blessed. I had her but a
Title:  single year, though; a short term of happiness for one who had seen her
Title:  youth fade in hopeless pining.
Title:  
Title:  There was something so commanding in the distress of the old man, that
Title:  Heyward did not dare to venture a syllable of consolation. Munro sat utterly
Title:  unconscious of the other's presence, his features exposed and working with
Title:  the anguish of his regrets, while heavy tears fell from his eyes, and rolled
Title:  unheeded from his cheeks to the floor. At length he moved, and as if
Title:  suddenly recovering his recollection; when he arose, and taking a single
Title:  turn across the room, he approached his companion with an air of military
Title:  grandeur, and demanded:
Title:  
Title:  Have you not, Major Heyward, some communication that I should hear from the
Title:  marquis de Montcalm?
Title:  
Title:  Duncan started in his turn, and immediately commenced in an embarrassed
Title:  voice, the half-forgotten message. It is unnecessary to dwell upon the
Title:  evasive though polite manner with which the French general had eluded every
Title:  attempt of Heyward to worm from him the purport of the communication he had
Title:  proposed making, or on the decided, though still polished message, by which
Title:  he now gave his enemy to understand, that, unless he chose to receive it in
Title:  person, he should not receive it at all. As Munro listened to the detail of
Title:  Duncan, the excited feelings of the father gradually gave way before the
Title:  obligations of his station, and when the other was done, he saw before him
Title:  nothing but the veteran, swelling with the wounded feelings of a soldier.
Title:  
Title:  You have said enough, Major Heyward, exclaimed the angry old man; enough to
Title:  make a volume of commentary on French civility. Here has this gentleman
Title:  invited me to a conference, and when I send him a capable substitute, for
Title:  ye're all that, Duncan, though your years are but few, he answers me with a
Title:  riddle.
Title:  
Title:  He may have thought less favorably of the substitue, my dear sir; and you
Title:  will remember that the invitation, which he now repeats, was to the
Title:  commandant of the works, and not to his second.
Title:  
Title:  Well, sir, is not a substitute clothed with all the power and dignity of him
Title:  who grants the commission? He wishes to confer with Munro! Faith, sir, I
Title:  have much inclination to indulge the man, if it should only be to let him
Title:  behold the firm countenance we maintain in spite of his numbers and his
Title:  summons. There might be not bad policy in such a stroke, young man.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, who believe it of the last importance that they should speedily come
Title:  to the contents of the letter borne by the scout, gladly encouraged this
Title:  idea.
Title:  
Title:  Without doubt, he could gather no confidence by witnessing our indifference,
Title:  he said.
Title:  
Title:  You never said truer word. I could wish, sir, that he would visit the works
Title:  in open day, and in the form of a storming party; that is the least failing
Title:  method of proving the countenance of an enemy, and would be far preferable
Title:  to the battering system he has chosen. The beauty and manliness of warfare
Title:  has been much deformed, Major Heyward, by the arts of your Monsieur Vauban.
Title:  Our ancestors were far above such scientific cowardice!
Title:  
Title:  It may be very true, sir; but we are now obliged to repel art by art. What
Title:  is your pleasure in the matter of the interview?
Title:  
Title:  I will meet the Frenchman, and that without fear or delay; promptly, sir, as
Title:  becomes a servant of my royal master. Go, Major Heyward, and give them a
Title:  flourish of the music; and send out a messenger to let them know who is
Title:  coming. We will follow with a small guard, for such respect is due to one
Title:  who holds the honor of his king in keeping; and hark'ee, Duncan, he added,
Title:  in a half whisper, though they were alone, it may be prudent to have some
Title:  aid at hand, in case there should be treachery at the bottom of it all.
Title:  
Title:  The young man availed himself of this order to quit the apartment; and, as
Title:  the day was fast coming to a close, he hastened without delay, to make the
Title:  necessary arrangements. A very few minutes only were necessary to parade a
Title:  few files, and to dispatch an orderly with a flag to announce the approach
Title:  of the commandant of the fort. When Duncan had done both these, he led the
Title:  guard to the sally-port, near which he found his superior ready, waiting his
Title:  appearance. As soon as the usual ceremonials of a military departure were
Title:  observed, the veteran and his more youthful companion left the fortress,
Title:  attended by the escort.
Title:  
Title:  They had proceeded only a hundred yards from the works, when the little
Title:  array which attended the French general to the conference was seen issuing
Title:  from the hollow way which formed the bed of a brook that ran between the
Title:  batteries of the besiegers and the fort. From the moment that Munro left his
Title:  own works to appear in front of his enemy's, his air had been grand, and his
Title:  step and countenance highly military. The instant he caught a glimpse of the
Title:  white plume that waved in the hat of Montcalm, his eye lighted, and age no
Title:  longer appeared to possess any influence over his vast and still muscular
Title:  person.
Title:  
Title:  Speak to the boys to be watchful, sir, he said, in an undertone, to Duncan;
Title:  and to look well to their flints and steel, for one is never safe with a
Title:  servant of these Louis's; at the same time, we shall show them the front of
Title:  men in deep security. Ye'll understand me, Major Heyward!
Title:  
Title:  He was interrupted by the clamor of a drum from the approaching Frenchmen,
Title:  which was immediately answered, when each party pushed an orderly in
Title:  advance, bearing a white flag, and the wary Scotsman halted with his guard
Title:  close at his back. As soon as this slight salutation had passed, Montcalm
Title:  moved toward them with a quick but graceful step, baring his head to the
Title:  veteran, and dropping his spotless plume nearly to the earth in courtesy. If
Title:  the air of Munro was more commanding and manly, it wanted both the ease and
Title:  insinuating polish of that of the Frenchman. Neither spoke for a few
Title:  moments, each regarding the other with curious and interested eyes. Then, as
Title:  became his superior rank and the nature of the interview, Montcalm broke the
Title:  silence. After uttering the usual words of greeting, he turned to Duncan,
Title:  and continued, with a smile of recognition, speaking always in French:
Title:  
Title:  I am rejoiced, monsieur, that you have given us the pleasure of your company
Title:  on this occasion. There will be no necessity to employ an ordinary
Title:  interpreter; for, in your hands, I feel the same security as if I spoke your
Title:  langauge myself.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan acknowledged the compliment, when Montcalm, turning to his guard,
Title:  which in imitation of that of their enemies, pressed close upon him,
Title:  continued:
Title:  
Title:  En arriere, mes enfants - il fait chaud - retirez-vous un peu.
Title:  
Title:  Before Major Heyward would imitate this proof of confidence, he glanced his
Title:  eyes around the plain, and beheld with uneasiness the numerous dusky groups
Title:  of savages, who looked out from the margin of the surrounding woods, curious
Title:  spectators of the interview.
Title:  
Title:  Monsieur de Montcalm will readily acknowledge the difference in our
Title:  situation, he said, with some embarrassment, pointing at the same time
Title:  toward those dangerous foes, who were to be seen in almost every direction.
Title:  were we to dismiss our guard, we should stand here at the mercy of our
Title:  enemies.
Title:  
Title:  Monsieur, you have the plighted faith of un gentilhomme Francais, for your
Title:  safety, returned Montcalm, laying his hand impressively on his heart; it
Title:  should suffice.
Title:  
Title:  It shall. Fall back, Duncan added to the officer who led the escort; fall
Title:  back, sir, beyond hearing, and wait for orders.
Title:  
Title:  Munro witnessed this movement with manifest uneasiness; nor did he fail to
Title:  demand an instant explanation.
Title:  
Title:  Is it not our interest, sir, to betray distrust? retorted Duncan. Monsieur
Title:  de Montcalm pledges his word for our safety, and I have ordered the men to
Title:  withdraw a little, in order to prove how much we depend on his assurance.
Title:  
Title:  It may be all right, sir, but I have no overweening reliance on the faith of
Title:  these marquesses, or marquis, as they call themselves. Their patents of
Title:  nobility are too common to be certain that they bear the seal of true honor.
Title:  
Title:  You forget, dear sir, that we confer with an officer, distinguished alike in
Title:  Europe and America for his deeds. From a soldier of his reputation we can
Title:  have nothing to apprehend.
Title:  
Title:  The old man made a gesture of resignation, though his rigid features still
Title:  betrayed his obstinate adherence to a distrust, which he derived from a sort
Title:  of hereditary contempt of his enemy, rather than from any present signs
Title:  which might warrant so uncharitable a feeling. Montcalm waited patiently
Title:  until this little dialogue in demi-voice was ended, when he drew nigher, and
Title:  opened the subject of their conference.
Title:  
Title:  I have solicited this interview from your superior, monsieur, he said,
Title:  because I believe he will allow himself to be persuaded that he has already
Title:  done everything which is necessary for the honor of his prince, and will now
Title:  listen to the admonitions of humanity. I will forever bear testimony that
Title:  his resistance has been gallant, and was continued as long as there was
Title:  hope.
Title:  
Title:  When this opening was translated to Munro, he answered with dignity, but
Title:  with sufficienct courtesy:
Title:  
Title:  However I may prize such testimony from Monsieur Montcalm, it will be more
Title:  valuable when it shall be better merited.
Title:  
Title:  The French general smiled, as Duncan gave him the purport of this reply, and
Title:  observed:
Title:  
Title:  What is now so freely accorded to approved courage, may be refused to
Title:  useless obstinacy. Monsieur would wish to see my camp, and witness for
Title:  himself our numbers, and the impossibility of his resisting them with
Title:  success?
Title:  
Title:  I know that the king of France is well served, returned the unmoved
Title:  Scotsman, as soon as Duncan ended his translation; but my own royal master
Title:  has as many and as faithful troops.
Title:  
Title:  Though not at hand, fortunately for us, said Montcalm, without waiting, in
Title:  his ardor, for the interpreter. There is a destiny in war, to which a brave
Title:  man knows how to submit with the same courage that he faces his foes.
Title:  
Title:  Had I been conscious that Monsieur Montcalm was master of the English, I
Title:  should have spared myself the trouble of so awkward a translation, said the
Title:  vexed Duncan, dryly; remembering instantly his recent by-play with Munro.
Title:  
Title:  Your pardon, monsieur, rejoined the Frenchman, suffering a slight color to
Title:  appear on his dark cheek. There is a vast difference between understanding
Title:  and speaking a foreign tongue; you will, therefore, please to assist me
Title:  still. Then, after a short pause, he added: These hills afford us every
Title:  opportunity of reconnoitering your works, messieurs, and I am possibly as
Title:  well acquainted with their weak condition as you can be yourselves.
Title:  
Title:  Ask the French general if his glasses can reach to the Hudson, said Munro,
Title:  proudly; and if he knows when and where to expect the army of Webb.
Title:  
Title:  Let General Webb be his own interpreter, returned the politic Montcalm,
Title:  suddenly extending an open letter toward Munro as he spoke; you will there
Title:  learn, monsieur, that his movements are not likely to prove embarrassing to
Title:  my army.
Title:  
Title:  The veteran seized the offered paper, without waiting for Duncan to
Title:  translate the speech, and with an eagerness that betrayed how important he
Title:  deemed its contents. As his eye passed hastily over the words, his
Title:  countenance changed from its look of military pride to one of deep chagrin;
Title:  his lip began to quiver; and suffering the paper to fall from his hand, his
Title:  head dropped upon his chest, like that of a man whose hopes were withered at
Title:  a single blow. Duncan caught the letter from the ground, and without apology
Title:  for the liberty he took, he read at a glance its cruel purport. Their common
Title:  superior, so far from encouraging them to resist, advised a speedy
Title:  surrender, urging in the plainest language, as a reason, the utter
Title:  impossibility of his sending a single man to their rescue.
Title:  
Title:  Here is no deception! exclaimed Duncan, examining the billet both inside and
Title:  out; this is the signature of Webb, and must be the captured letter.
Title:  
Title:  The man has betrayed me! Munro at length bitterly exclaimed; he has brought
Title:  dishonor to the door of one where disgrace was never before known to dwell,
Title:  and shame has he heaped heavily on my gray hairs.
Title:  
Title:  Say not so, cried Duncan; we are yet masters of the fort, and of our honor.
Title:  Let us, then, sell our lives at such a rate as shall make our enemies
Title:  believe the purchase too dear.
Title:  
Title:  Boy, I thank thee, exclaimed the old man, rousing himself from his stupor;
Title:  you have, for once, reminded Munro of his duty. We will go back, and dig our
Title:  graves behind those ramparts.
Title:  
Title:  Messieurs, said Montcalm, advancing toward them a step, in generous
Title:  interest, you little know Louis de St. Veran if you believe him capable of
Title:  profiting by this letter to humble brave men, or to build up a dishonest
Title:  reputation for himself. Listen to my terms before you leave me.
Title:  
Title:  What says the Frenchman? demanded the veteran, sternly; does he make a merit
Title:  of having captured a scout, with a note from headquarters? Sir, he had
Title:  better raise this siege, to go and sit down before Edward if he wishes to
Title:  frighten his enemy with words.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan explained the other's meaning.
Title:  
Title:  Monsieur de Montcalm, we will hear you, the veteran added, more calmly, as
Title:  Duncan ended.
Title:  
Title:  To retain the fort is now impossible, said his liberal enemy; it is
Title:  necessary to the interests of my master that it should be destroyed; but as
Title:  for yourselves and your brave comrades, there is no privilege dear to a
Title:  soldier that shall be denied.
Title:  
Title:  Our colors? demanded Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Carry them to England, and show them to your king.
Title:  
Title:  Our arms?
Title:  
Title:  Keep them; none can use them better.
Title:  
Title:  Our march; the surrender of the place?
Title:  
Title:  Shall all be done in a way most honorable to yourselves.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan now turned to explain these proposals to his commander, who heard him
Title:  with amazement, and a sensibility that was deeply touched by so unusual and
Title:  unexpected generosity.
Title:  
Title:  Go you, Duncan, he said; go with this marquess, as, indeed, marquess he
Title:  should be; go to his marquee and arrange it all. I have lived to see two
Title:  things in my old age that never did I expect to behold. An Englishman afraid
Title:  to support a friend, and a Frenchman too honest to profit by his advantage.
Title:  
Title:  So saying, the veteran again dropped his head to his chest, and returned
Title:  slowly toward the fort, exhibiting, by the dejection of his air, to the
Title:  anxious garrison, a harbinger of evil tidings.
Title:  
Title:  From the shock of this unexpected blow the haughty feelings of Munro never
Title:  recovered; but from that moment there commenced a change in his determined
Title:  character, which accompanied him to a speedy grave. Duncan remained to
Title:  settle the terms of the capitulation. He was seen to re-enter the works
Title:  during the first watches of the night, and immediately after a private
Title:  conference with the commandant, to leave them again. It was then openly
Title:  announced that hostilities must cease - Munro having signed a treaty by
Title:  which the place was to be yielded to the enemy, with the morning; the
Title:  garrison to retain their arms, the colors and their baggage, and,
Title:  consequently, according to military opinion, their honor.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 17
Title:  
Title:       Weave we the woof. The thread is spun.
Title:       The web is wove. The work is done.
Title:  
Title:                                                                    GRAY
Title:  
Title:  The hostile armies, which lay in the wilds of the Horican, passed the night
Title:  of the ninth of August, 1757, much in the manner they would, had they
Title:  encountered on the fairest field of Europe. While the conquered were still,
Title:  sullen, and dejected, the victors triumphed. But there are limits alike to
Title:  grief and joy; and long before the watches of the morning came the stillness
Title:  of those boundless woods was only broken by a gay call from some exulting
Title:  young Frenchman of the advanced pickets, or a menacing challenge from the
Title:  fort, which sternly forbade the approach of any hostile footsteps before the
Title:  stipulated moment. Even these occasional threatening sounds ceased to be
Title:  heard in that dull hour which precedes the day, at which period a listener
Title:  might have sought in vain any evidence of the presence of those armed powers
Title:  that then slumbered on the shores of the holy lake.
Title:  
Title:  It was during these moments of deep silence that the canvas which concealed
Title:  the entrance to a spacious marquee in the French encampment was shoved
Title:  aside, and a man issued from beneath the drapery into the open air. He was
Title:  enveloped in a cloak that might have been intended as a protection from the
Title:  chilling damps of the woods, but which served equally well as a mantle to
Title:  conceal his person. He was permitted to pass the grenadier, who watched over
Title:  the slumbers of the French commander, without interruption, the man making
Title:  the usual salute which betokens military deference, as the other passed
Title:  swiftly through the little city of tents, in the direction of William Henry.
Title:  Whenever this unknown individual encountered one of the numberless sentinels
Title:  who crossed his path, his answer was prompt, and, as it appeared,
Title:  satisfactory; for he was uniformly allowed to proceed without further
Title:  interrogation.
Title:  
Title:  With the exception of such repeated but brief interruptions, he had moved
Title:  silently from the center of the camp to its most advanced outposts, when he
Title:  drew nigh the soldier who held his watch nearest to the works of the enemy.
Title:  As he approached he was received with the usual challenge:
Title:  
Title:  Qui vive?
Title:  
Title:  France, was the reply.
Title:  
Title:  Le mot d'ordre?
Title:  
Title:  La victorie, said the other, drawing so nigh as to be heard in a loud
Title:  whisper.
Title:  
Title:  C'est bien, returned the sentinel, throwing his musket from the charge to
Title:  his shoulder; vous promenez bien matin, monsieur!
Title:  
Title:  Il est necessaire d'etre vigilant, mon enfant, the other observed, dropping
Title:  a fold of his cloak, and looking the soldier close in the face as he passed
Title:  him, still continuing his way toward the British fortification. The man
Title:  started; his arms rattled heavily as he threw them forward in the lowest and
Title:  most respectful salute; and when he had again recovered his piece, he turned
Title:  to walk his post, muttering between his teeth:
Title:  
Title:  Il faut etre vigilant, en verite! je crois que nous avons la, un caporal qui
Title:  ne dort jamais!
Title:  
Title:  The officer proceeded, without affecting to hear the words which escaped the
Title:  sentinel in his surprise; nor did he again pause until he had reached the
Title:  low strand, and in a somewhat dangerous vicinity to the western water
Title:  bastion of the fort. The light of an obscure moon was just sufficient to
Title:  render objects, though dim, perceptible in their outlines. He, therefore,
Title:  took the precaution to place himself against the trunk of a tree, where he
Title:  leaned for many minutes, and seemed to contemplate the dark and silent
Title:  mounds of the English works in profound attention. His gaze at the ramparts
Title:  was not that of a curious or idle spectator; but his looks wandered from
Title:  point to point, denoting his knowledge of military usages, and betraying
Title:  that his search was not unaccompanied by distrust. At length he appeared
Title:  satisfied; and having cast his eyes impatiently upward toward the summit of
Title:  the eastern mountain, as if anticipating the approach of the morning, he was
Title:  in the act of turning on his footsteps, when a light sound on the nearest
Title:  angle of the bastion caught his ear, and induced him to remain.
Title:  
Title:  Just then a figure was seen to approach the edge of the rampart, where it
Title:  stood, apparently contemplating in its turn the distant tents of the French
Title:  encampment. Its head was then turned toward the east, as though equally
Title:  anxious for the appearance of light, when the form leaned against the mound,
Title:  and seemed to gaze upon the glassy expanse of the waters, which, like a
Title:  submarine firmament, glittered with its thousand mimic stars. The melancholy
Title:  air, the hour, together with the vast frame of the man who thus leaned,
Title:  musing, against the English ramparts, left no doubt as to his person in the
Title:  mind of the observant spectator. Delicacy, no less than prudence, now urged
Title:  him to retire; and he had moved cautiously round the body of the tree for
Title:  that purpose, when another sound drew his attention, and once more arrested
Title:  his footsteps. It was a low and almost inaudible movement of the water, and
Title:  was succeeded by a grating of pebbles one against the other. In a moment he
Title:  saw a dark form rise, as it were, out of the lake, and steal without further
Title:  noise to the land, within a few feet of the place where he himself stood. A
Title:  rifle next slowly rose between his eyes and the watery mirror; but before it
Title:  could be discharged his own hand was on the lock.
Title:  
Title:  Hugh! exclaimed the savage, whose treacherous aim was so singularly and so
Title:  unexpectedly interrupted.
Title:  
Title:  Without making any reply, the French officer laid his hand on the shoulder
Title:  of the Indian, and led him in profound silence to a distance from the spot,
Title:  where their subsequent dialogue might have proved dangerous, and where it
Title:  seemed that one of them, at least, sought a victim. Then throwing open his
Title:  cloak, so as to expose his uniform and the cross of St. Louis which was
Title:  suspended at his breast, Montcalm sternly demanded:
Title:  
Title:  What means this? Does not my son know that the hatchet is buried between the
Title:  English and his Canadian Father?
Title:  
Title:  What can the Hurons do? returned the savage, speaking also, though
Title:  imperfectly, in the French language.
Title:  
Title:  Not a warrior has a scalp, and the pale faces make friends!
Title:  
Title:  Ha, Le Renard Subtil! Methinks this is an excess of zeal for a friend who
Title:  was so late an enemy! How many suns have set since Le Renard struck the
Title:  war-post of the English?
Title:  
Title:  Where is that sun? demanded the sullen savage. Behind the hill; and it is
Title:  dark and cold. But when he comes again, it will be bright and warm. Le
Title:  Subtil is the sun of his tribe. There have been clouds, and many mountains
Title:  between him and his nation; but now he shines and it is a clear sky!
Title:  
Title:  That Le Renard has power with his people, I well know, said Montcalm; for
Title:  yesterday he hunted for their scalps, and to-day they hear him at the
Title:  council-fire.
Title:  
Title:  Magua is a great chief.
Title:  
Title:  Let him prove it, by teaching his nation how to conduct themselves toward
Title:  our new friends.
Title:  
Title:  Why did the chief of the Canadas bring his young men into the woods, and
Title:  fire his cannon at the earthen house? demanded the subtle Indian.
Title:  
Title:  To subdue it. My master owns the land, and your father was ordered to drive
Title:  off these English squatters. They have consented to go, and now he calls
Title:  them enemies no longer.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis well. Magua took the hatchet to color it with blood. It is now bright;
Title:  when it is red, it shall be buried.
Title:  
Title:  But Magua is pledged not to sully the lilies of France. The enemies of the
Title:  great king across the salt lake are his enemies; his friends, the friends of
Title:  the Hurons.
Title:  
Title:  Friends! repeated the Indian in scorn. Let his father give Magua a hand.
Title:  
Title:  Montcalm, who felt that his influence over the warlike tribes he had
Title:  gathered was to be maintained by concession rather than by power, complied
Title:  reluctantly with the other's request. The savage placed the fingers of the
Title:  French commander on a deep scar in his bosom, and then exultingly demanded:
Title:  
Title:  Does my father know that?
Title:  
Title:  What warrior does not? 'Tis where a leaden bullet has cut.
Title:  
Title:  And this? continued the Indian, who had turned his naked back to the other,
Title:  his body being without its usual calico mantle.
Title:  
Title:  This! - my son has been sadly injured here; who has done this?
Title:  
Title:  Magua slept hard in the English wigwams, and the sticks have left their
Title:  mark, returned the savage, with a hollow laugh, which did not conceal the
Title:  fierce temper that nearly choked him. Then, recollecting himself, with
Title:  sudden and native dignity, he added: Go; teach your young men it is peace.
Title:  Le Renard Subtil knows how to speak to a Huron warrior.
Title:  
Title:  Without deigning to bestow further words, or to wait for any answer, the
Title:  savage cast his rifle into the hollow of his arm, and moved silently through
Title:  the encampment toward the woods where his own tribe was known to lie. Every
Title:  few yards as he proceeded he was challenged by the sentinels; but he stalked
Title:  sullenly onward, utterly disregarding the summons of the soldiers, who only
Title:  spared his life because they knew the air and tread no less than the
Title:  obstinate daring of an Indian.
Title:  
Title:  Montcalm lingered long and melancholy on the strand where he had been left
Title:  by his companion, brooding deeply on the temper which his ungovernable ally
Title:  had just discovered. Already had his fair fame been tarnished by one horrid
Title:  scene, and in circumstances fearfully resembling those under which he how
Title:  found himself. As he mused he became keenly sensible of the deep
Title:  responsibility they assume who disregard the means to attain the end, and of
Title:  all the danger of setting in motion an engine which it exceeds human power
Title:  to control. Then shaking off a train of reflections that he accounted a
Title:  weakness in such a moment of triumph, he retraced his steps toward his tent,
Title:  giving the order as he passed to make the signal that should arouse the army
Title:  from its slumbers.
Title:  
Title:  The first tap of the French drums was echoed from the bosom of the fort, and
Title:  presently the valley was filled with the strains of martial music, rising
Title:  long, thrilling and lively above the rattling accompaniment. The horns of
Title:  the victors sounded merry and cheerful flourishes, until the last laggard of
Title:  the camp was at his post; but the instant the British fifes had blown their
Title:  shrill signal, they became mute. In the meantime the day had dawned, and
Title:  when the line of the French army was ready to receive its general, the rays
Title:  of a brilliant sun were glancing along the glittering array. Then that
Title:  success, which was already so well known, was officially announced; the
Title:  favored band who were selected to guard the gates of the fort were detailed,
Title:  and defiled before their chief; the signal of their approach was given, and
Title:  all the usual preparations for a change of masters were ordered and executed
Title:  directly under the guns of the contested works.
Title:  
Title:  A very different scene presented itself within the lines of the
Title:  Anglo-American army. As soon as the warning signal was given, it exhibited
Title:  all the signs of a hurried and forced departure. The sullen soldiers
Title:  shouldered their empty tubes and fell into their places, like men whose
Title:  blood had been heated by the past contest, and who only desired the
Title:  opportunity to revenge an indignity which was still wounding to their pride,
Title:  concealed as it was under the observances of military etiquette.
Title:  
Title:  Women and children ran from place to place, some bearing the scanty remnants
Title:  of their baggage, and others searching in the ranks for those countenances
Title:  they looked up to for protection.
Title:  
Title:  Munro appeared among his silent troops firm but dejected. It was evident
Title:  that the unexpected blow had struck deep into his heart, though he struggled
Title:  to sustain his misfortune with the port of a man.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan was touched at the quiet and impressive exhibition of his grief. He
Title:  had discharged his own duty, and he now pressed to the side of the old man,
Title:  to know in what particular he might serve him.
Title:  
Title:  My daughters, was the brief but expressive reply.
Title:  
Title:  Good heavens! are not arrangements already made for their convenience?
Title:  
Title:  To-day I am only a soldier, Major Heyward, said the veteran. All that you
Title:  see here, claim alike to be my children.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan had heard enough. Without losing one of those moments which had now
Title:  become so precious, he flew toward the quarters of Munro, in quest of the
Title:  sisters. He found them on the threshold of the low edifice, already prepared
Title:  to depart, and surrounded by a clamorous and weeping assemblage of their own
Title:  sex, that had gathered about the place, with a sort of instinctive
Title:  consciousness that it was the point most likely to be protected. Though the
Title:  cheeks of Cora were pale and her countenance anxious, she had lost none of
Title:  her firmness; but the eyes of Alice were inflamed, and betrayedhow long and
Title:  bitterly she had wept. They both, however, received the young man with
Title:  undisguised pleasure; the former, for a novelty, being the first to speak.
Title:  
Title:  The fort is lost, she said, with a melancholy smile; though our good name, I
Title:  trust, remains.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis brighter than ever. But, dearest Miss Munro, it is time to think less
Title:  of others, and to make some provision for yourself. Military usage - pride -
Title:  that pride on which you so much value yourself, demands that your father and
Title:  I should for a little while continue with the troops. Then where to seek a
Title:  proper protector for you against the confusion and chances of such a scene?
Title:  
Title:  None is necessary, returned Cora; who will dare to injure or insult the
Title:  daughter of such a father, at a time like this?
Title:  
Title:  I would not leave you alone, continued the youth, looking about him in a
Title:  hurried manner, for the command of the best regiment in the pay of the king.
Title:  Remember, our Alice is not gifted with all your firmness, and God only knows
Title:  the terror she might endure.
Title:  
Title:  You may be right, Cora replied, smiling again, but far more sadly than
Title:  before. Listen! chance has already sent us a friend when he is most needed.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan did listen, and on the instant comprehended her meaning. The low and
Title:  serious sounds of the sacred music, so well known to the eastern provinces,
Title:  caught his ear, and instantly drew him to an apartment in an adjacent
Title:  building, which had already been deserted by its customary tenants. There he
Title:  found David, pouring out his pious feelings through the only medium in which
Title:  he ever indulged. Duncan waited, until, by the cessation of the movement of
Title:  the hand, he believed the strain was ended, when, by touching his shoulder,
Title:  he drew the attention of the other to himself, and in a few words explained
Title:  his wishes.
Title:  
Title:  Even so, replied the single-minded disciple of the King of Israel, when the
Title:  young man had ended; I have found much that is comely and melodious in the
Title:  maidens, and it is fitting that we who have consorted in so much peril,
Title:  should abide together in peace. I will attend them, when I have completed my
Title:  morning praise, to which nothing is now wanting but the doxology. Wilt thou
Title:  bear a part, friend? The meter is common, and the tune Southwell.
Title:  
Title:  Then, extending the little volume, and giving the pitch of the air anew with
Title:  considerate attention, David recommenced and finished his strains, with a
Title:  fixedness of manner that it was not easy to interrupt. Heyward was fain to
Title:  wait until the verse ws ended; when, seeing David relieving himself from the
Title:  spectacles, and replacing the book, he continued.
Title:  
Title:  It will be your duty to see that none dare to approach the ladies with any
Title:  rude intention, or to offer insult or taunt at the misfortune of their brave
Title:  father. In this task you will be seconded by the domestics of their
Title:  household.
Title:  
Title:  Even so.
Title:  
Title:  It is possible that the Indians and stragglers of the enemy may intrude, in
Title:  which case you will remind them of the terms of the capitulation, and
Title:  threaten to report their conduct to Montcalm. A word will suffice.
Title:  
Title:  If not, I have that here which shall, returned David, exhibiting his book,
Title:  with an air in which meekness and confidence were singularly blended. Here
Title:  are words which, uttered, or rather thundered, with proper emphasis, and in
Title:  measured time, shall quiet the most unruly temper:
Title:  
Title:       Why rage the heathen furiously?
Title:  
Title:  Enough, said Heyward, interrupting the burst of his musical invocation; we
Title:  understand each other; it is time that we should now assume our respective
Title:  duties.
Title:  
Title:  Gamut cheerfully assented, and together they sought the females. Cora
Title:  received her new and somewhat extraordinary protector courteously, at least;
Title:  and even the pallid features of Alice lighted again with some of their
Title:  native archness as she thanked Heyward for his care. Duncan took occasion to
Title:  assure them he had done the best that circumstances permitted, and, as he
Title:  believed, quite enough for the security of their feelings; of danger there
Title:  was none. He then spoke gladly of his intention to rejoin them the moment he
Title:  had led the advance a few miles toward the Hudson, and immediately took his
Title:  leave.
Title:  
Title:  By this time the signal for departure had been given, and the head of the
Title:  English column was in motion. The sisters started at the sound, and glancing
Title:  their eyes around, they saw the white uniforms of the French grenadiers, who
Title:  had already taken possession of the gates of the fort. At that moment an
Title:  enormous cloud seemed to pass suddenly above their heads, and, looking
Title:  upward, they discovered that they stood beneath the wide folds of the
Title:  standard of France.
Title:  
Title:  Let us go, said Cora; this is no longer a fit place for the children of an
Title:  English officer.
Title:  
Title:  Alice clung to the arm of her sister, and together they left the parade,
Title:  accompanied by the moving throng that surrounded them.
Title:  
Title:  As they passed the gates, the French officers, who had learned their rank,
Title:  bowed often and low, forbearing, however, to intrude those attentions which
Title:  they saw, with peculiar tact, might not be agreeable. As every vehicle and
Title:  each beast of burden was occupied by the sick and wounded, Cora had decided
Title:  to endure the fatigues of a foot march, rather than interfere with their
Title:  comforts. Indeed, many a maimed and feeble soldier was compelled to drag his
Title:  exhausted limbs in the rear of the columns, for the want of the necessary
Title:  means of conveyance in that wilderness. The whole, however, was in motion;
Title:  the weak and wounded, groaning and in suffering; their comrades silent and
Title:  sullen; and the women and children in terror, they knew not of what.
Title:  
Title:  As the confused and timid throng left the protecting mounds of the fort, and
Title:  issued on the open plain, the whole scene was at once presented to their
Title:  eyes. At a little distance on the right, and somewhat in the rear, the
Title:  French army stood to their arms, Montcalm having collected his parties, so
Title:  soon as his guards had possession of the works. They were attentive but
Title:  silent observers of the proceedings of the vanquished, failing in none of
Title:  the stipulated military honors, and offering no taunt or insult, in their
Title:  success, to their less fortunate foes. Living masses of the English, to the
Title:  amount, in the whole, of near three thousand, were moving slowly across the
Title:  plain, toward the common center, and gradually approached each other, as
Title:  they converged to the point of their march, a vista cut through the lofty
Title:  trees, where the road to the Hudson entered the forest. Along the sweeping
Title:  borders of the woods hung a dark cloud of savages, eyeing the passage of
Title:  their enemies, and hovering at a distance, like vultures who were only kept
Title:  from swooping on their prey by the presence and restraint of a superior
Title:  army. A few had straggled among the conquered columns, where they stalked in
Title:  sullen discontent; attentive, though, as yet, passive observers of the
Title:  moving multitude.
Title:  
Title:  The advance, with Heyward at its head, had already reached the defile, and
Title:  was slowly disappearing, when the attention of Cora was drawn to a
Title:  collection of stragglers by the sounds of contention. A truant provincial
Title:  was paying the forfeit of his disobedience, by being plundered of those very
Title:  effects which had caused him to desert his place in the ranks. The man was
Title:  of powerful frame, and too avaricious to part with his goods without a
Title:  struggle. Individuals from either party interfered; the one side to prevent
Title:  and the other to aid in the robbery. Voices grew loud and angry, and a
Title:  hundred savages appeared, as it were, by magic, where a dozen only had been
Title:  seen a minute before. It was then that Cora saw the form of Magua gliding
Title:  among his countrymen, and speaking with his fatal and artful eloquence. The
Title:  mass of women and children stopped, and hovered together like alarmed and
Title:  fluttering birds. But the cupidity of the Indian was soon gratified, and the
Title:  different bodies again moved slowly onward.
Title:  
Title:  The savages now fell back, and seemed content to let their enemies advance
Title:  without further molestation. But, as the female crowd approached them, the
Title:  gaudy colors of a shawl attracted the eyes of a wild and untutored Huron. He
Title:  advanced to seize it without the least hesitation. The woman, more in terror
Title:  than through love of the ornament, wrapped her child in the coveted article,
Title:  and folded both more closely to her bosom. Cora was in the act of speaking,
Title:  with an intent to advise the woman to abandon the trifle, when the savage
Title:  relinquished his hold of the shawl, and tore the screaming infant from her
Title:  arms. Abandoning everything to the greedy grasp of those around her, the
Title:  mother darted, with distraction in her mien, to reclaim her child. The
Title:  Indian smiled grimly, and extended one hand, in sign of a willingness to
Title:  exchange, while, with the other, he flourished the babe over his head,
Title:  holding it by the feet as if to enhance the value of the ransom.
Title:  
Title:  Here - here - there - all - any - everything! exclaimed the breathless
Title:  woman, tearing the lighter articles of dress from her person with
Title:  ill-directed and trembling fingers; take all, but give me my babe!
Title:  
Title:  The savage spurned the worthless rags, and perceiving that the shawl had
Title:  already become a prize to another, his bantering but sullen smile changing
Title:  to a gleam of ferocity, he dashed the head of the infant against a rock, and
Title:  cast its quivering remains to her very feet. For an instant the mother
Title:  stood, like a statue of despair, looking wildly down at the unseemly object,
Title:  which had so lately nestled in her bosom and smiled in her face; and then
Title:  she raised her eyes and countenance toward heaven, as if calling on God to
Title:  curse the perpetrator of the foul deed. She was spared the sin of such a
Title:  prayer for, maddened at his disappointment, and excited at the sight of
Title:  blood, the Huron mercifully drove his tomahawk into her own brain. The
Title:  mother sank under the blow, and fell, grasping at her child, in death, with
Title:  the same engrossing love that had caused her to cherish it when living.
Title:  
Title:  At that dangerous moment, Magua placed his hands to his mouth, and raised
Title:  the fatal and appalling whoop. The scattered Indians started at the
Title:  well-known cry, as coursers bound at the signal to quit the goal; and
Title:  directly there arose such a yell along the plain, and through the arches of
Title:  the wood, as seldom burst from human lips before. They who heard it listened
Title:  with a curdling horror at the heart, little inferior to that dread which may
Title:  be expected to attend the blasts of the final summons.
Title:  
Title:  More than two thousand raving savages broke from the forest at the signal,
Title:  and threw themselves across the fatal plain with instinctive alacrity. We
Title:  shall not dwell on the revolting horrors that succeeded. Death was
Title:  everywhere, and in his most terrific and disgusting aspects. Resistance only
Title:  served to inflame the murderers, who inflicted their furious blows long
Title:  after their victims were beyond the power of their resentment. The flow of
Title:  blood might be likened to the outbreaking of a torrent; and as the natives
Title:  became heated and maddened by the sight, many among them even kneeled to the
Title:  earth, and drank freely, exultingly, hellishly, of the crimson tide.
Title:  
Title:  The trained bodies of the troops threw themselves quickly into solid masses,
Title:  endeavoring to awe their assailants by the imposing appearance of a military
Title:  front. The experiment in some measure succeeded, though far too many
Title:  suffered their unloaded muskets to be torn from their hands, in the vain
Title:  hope of appeasing the savages.
Title:  
Title:  In such a scene none had leisure to note the fleeting moments. It might have
Title:  been ten minutes (it seemed an age) that the sisters had stood riveted to
Title:  one spot, horror-stricken and nearly helpless. When the first blow was
Title:  struck, their screaming companions had pressed upon them in a body,
Title:  rendering flight impossible; and now that fear or death had scattered most,
Title:  if not all, from around them, they saw no avenue open, but such as conducted
Title:  to the tomahawks of their foes. On every side arose shrieks, groans,
Title:  exhortations and curses. At this moment, Alice caught a glimpse of the vast
Title:  form of her father, moving rapidly across the plain, in the direction of the
Title:  French army. He was, in truth, proceeding to Montcalm, fearless of every
Title:  danger, to claim the tardy escort for which he had before conditioned. Fifty
Title:  glittering axes and barbed spears were offered unheeded at his life, but the
Title:  savages respected his rank and calmness, even in their fury. The dangerous
Title:  weapons were brushed aside by the still nervous arm of the veteran, or fell
Title:  of themselves, after menacing an act that it would seem no one had courage
Title:  to perform. Fortunately, the vindictive Magua was searching for his victim
Title:  in the very band the veteran hd just quitted.
Title:  
Title:  Father - father - we are here! shrieked Alice, as he passed, at no great
Title:  distance, without appearing to heed them. Come to us, father, or we die!
Title:  
Title:  The cry was repeated, and in terms and tones that might have melted a heart
Title:  of stone, but it was unanswered. Once, indeed, the old man appeared to catch
Title:  the sound, for he paused and listened; but Alice had dropped senseless on
Title:  the earth, and Cora had sunk at her side, hovering in untiring tenderness
Title:  over her lifeless form. Munro shook his head in disappointment, and
Title:  proceeded, bent on the high duty of his station.
Title:  
Title:  Lady, said Gamut, who, helpless and useless as he was, had not yet dreamed
Title:  of deserting his trust, it is the jubilee of the devils, and this is not a
Title:  meet place for Christians to tarry in. Let us up and fly.
Title:  
Title:  Go, said Cora, still gazing at her unconscious sister; save thyself. To me
Title:  thou canst not be of further use.
Title:  
Title:  David comprehended the unyielding character of her resolution, by the simple
Title:  but expressive gesture that accompanied her words. He gazed for a moment at
Title:  the dusky forms that were acting their hellish rites on every side of him,
Title:  and his tall person grew more erect while his chest heaved, and every
Title:  feature swelled, and seemed to speak with the power of the feelings by which
Title:  he was governed.
Title:  
Title:  If the Jewish boy might tame the great spirit of Saul by the sound of his
Title:  harp, and the words of sacred song, it may not be amiss, he said, to try the
Title:  potency of music here.
Title:  
Title:  Then raising his voice to its highest tone, he poured out a strain so
Title:  powerful as to be heard even amid the din of that bloody field. More than
Title:  one savage rushed toward them, thinking to rifle the unprotected sisters of
Title:  their attire, and bear away their scalps; but when they found this strange
Title:  and unmoved figure riveted to his post, they paused to listen. Astonishment
Title:  soon changed to admiration, and they passed on to other and less courageous
Title:  victims, openly expressing their satisfaction at the firmness with which the
Title:  white warrior sang his death song. Encouraged and deluded by his success,
Title:  David exerted all his powers to extend what he believed so holy an
Title:  influence. The unwonted sounds caught the ears of a distant savage, who flew
Title:  raging from group to group, like one who, scorning to touch the vulgar herd,
Title:  hunted for some victim more worthy of his renown. It was Magua, who uttered
Title:  a yell of pleasure when he beheld his ancient prisoners again at his mercy.
Title:  
Title:  Come, he said, laying his soiled hands on the dress of Cora, the wigwam of
Title:  the Huron is still open. Is it not better than this place?
Title:  
Title:  Away! cried Cora, veiling her eyes from his revolting aspect.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian laughed tauntingly, as he held up his reeking hand, and answered:
Title:  It is red, but it comes from white veins!
Title:  
Title:  Monster! there is blood, oceans of blood, upon thy soul; thy spirit has
Title:  moved this scene.
Title:  
Title:  Magua is a great chief! returned the exulting savage, will the dark-hair go
Title:  to his tribe?
Title:  
Title:  Never! strike if thou wilt, and complete thy revenge. He hesitated a moment,
Title:  and then catching the light and senseless form of Alice in his arms, the
Title:  subtle Indian moved swiftly across the plain toward the woods.
Title:  
Title:  Hold! shrieked Cora, following wildly on his footsteps; release the child!
Title:  wretch! what is't you do?
Title:  
Title:  But Magua was deaf to her voice; or, rather, he knew his power, and was
Title:  determined to maintain it.
Title:  
Title:  Stay - lady - stay, called Gamut, after the unconscious Cora. The holy charm
Title:  is beginning to be felt, and soon shalt thou see this horrid tumult stilled.
Title:  
Title:  Perceiving that, in his turn, he was unheeded, the faithful David followed
Title:  the distracted sister, raising his voice again in sacred song, and sweeping
Title:  the air to the measure, with his long arm, in diligent accompaniment. In
Title:  this manner they traversed the plain, through the flying, the wounded and
Title:  the dead. The fierce Huron was, at any time, sufficient for himself and the
Title:  victim that he bore; though Cora would have fallen more than once under the
Title:  blows of her savage enemies, but for the extraordinary being who stalked in
Title:  her rear, and who now appeared to the astonished natives gifted with the
Title:  protecting spirit of madness.
Title:  
Title:  Magua, who knew how to avoid the more pressing dangers, and also to elude
Title:  pursuit, entered the woods through a low ravine, where he quickly found the
Title:  Narragansetts, which the travelers had abandoned so shortly before, awaiting
Title:  his appearance, in custody of a savage as fierce and malign in his
Title:  expression as himself. Laying Alice on one of the horses, he made a sign to
Title:  Cora to mount the other.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding the horror excited by the presence of her captor, there was
Title:  a present relief in escaping from the bloody scene enacting on the plain, to
Title:  which Cora could not be altogether insensible. She took her seat, and held
Title:  forth her arms for her sister, with an air of entreaty and love that even
Title:  the Huron could not deny. Placing Alice, then, on the same animal with Cora,
Title:  he seized the bridle, and commenced his route by plunging deeper into the
Title:  forest. David, perceiving that he was left alone, utterly disregarded as a
Title:  subject too worthless even to destroy, threw his long limb across the saddle
Title:  of the beast they had deserted, and made such progress in the pursuit as the
Title:  difficulties of the path permitted.
Title:  
Title:  They soon began to ascend; but as the motion had a tendency to revive the
Title:  dormant faculties of her sister, the attention of Cora was too much divided
Title:  between the tenderest solicitude in her behalf, and in listening to the
Title:  cries which were still too audible on the plain, to note the direction in
Title:  which they journeyed. When, however, they gained the flattened surface of
Title:  the mountain-top, and approached the eastern precipice, she recognized the
Title:  spot to which she had once before been led under the more friendly auspices
Title:  of the scout. Here Magua suffered them to dismount; and notwithstanding
Title:  their own captivity, the curiosity which seems inseparable from horror,
Title:  induced them to gaze at the sickening sight below.
Title:  
Title:  The cruel work was still unchecked. On every side the captured were flying
Title:  before their relentless persecutors, while the armed columns of the
Title:  Christian king stood fast in an apathy which has never been explained, and
Title:  which has left an immovable blot on the otherwise fair escutcheon of their
Title:  leader. Nor was the sword of death stayed until cupidity got the mastery of
Title:  revenge. Then, indeed, the shrieks of the wounded, and the yells of their
Title:  murderers grew less frequent, until, finally, the cries of horror were lost
Title:  to their ear, or were drowned in the loud, long and piercing whoops of the
Title:  triumphant savages. 1
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 The accounts of the number who fell in this unhappy affair vary between
Title:  five and fifteen hundred.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 18
Title:  
Title:       Why, anything;
Title:       An honorable murderer, if you will;
Title:       For naught I did in hate, but all in honor.
Title:  
Title:                                                                 OTHELLO
Title:  
Title:  The bloody and inhuman scene rather incidentally mentioned than described in
Title:  the preceding chapter, is conspicuous in the pages of colonial history by
Title:  the merited title of The Massacre of William Henry. It so far deepened the
Title:  stain which a previous and very similar event had left upon the reputation
Title:  of the French commander that it was not entirely erased by his early and
Title:  glorious death. It is now becoming obscured by time; and thousands, who know
Title:  that Montcalm died like a hero on the plains of Abraham, have yet to learn
Title:  how much he was deficient in that moral courage without which no man can be
Title:  truly great. Pages might be written to prove, from this illustrious example,
Title:  the defects of human excellence; to show how easy it is for generous
Title:  sentiments, high courtesy, and chivalrous courage to lose their influence
Title:  beneath the chilling blight of selfishness, and to exhibit to the world a
Title:  man who was great in all the minor attributes of character, but who was
Title:  found wanting when it became necessary to prove how much principle is
Title:  superior to policy. But the task would exceed our prerogatives; and, as
Title:  history, like love, is so apt to surround her heroes with an atmosphere of
Title:  imaginary brightness, it is probable that Louis de Saint Veran will be
Title:  viewed by posterity only as the gallant defender of his country, while his
Title:  cruel apathy on the shores of the Oswego and of the Horican will be
Title:  forgotten. Deeply regretting this weakness on the part of a sister muse, we
Title:  shall at once retire from her sacred precincts, within the proper limits of
Title:  our own humble vocation.
Title:  
Title:  The third day from the capture of the fort was drawing to a close, but the
Title:  business of the narrative must still detain the reader on the shores of the
Title:  holy lake. When last seen, the environs of the works were filled with
Title:  violence and uproar. They were now possessed by stillness and death. The
Title:  blood-stained conquerors had departed; and their camp, which had so lately
Title:  rung with the merry rejoicings of a victorious army, lay a silent and
Title:  deserted city of huts. The fortress was a smoldering ruin; charred rafters,
Title:  fragments of exploded artillery, and rent mason-work covering its earthen
Title:  mounds in confused disorder.
Title:  
Title:  A frightful change had also occurred in the season. The sun had hid its
Title:  warmth behind an impenetrable mass of vapor, and hundreds of human forms,
Title:  which had blackened beneath the fierce heats of August, were stiffening in
Title:  their deformity before the blasts of a premature November. The curling and
Title:  spotless mists, which had been seen sailing above the hills toward the
Title:  north, were now returning in an interminable dusky sheet, that was urged
Title:  along by the fury of a tempest. The crowded mirror of the Horican was gone;
Title:  and, in its place, the green and angry waters lashed the shores, as if
Title:  indignantly casting back its impurities to the polluted strand. Still the
Title:  clear fountain retained a portion of its charmed influence, but it reflected
Title:  only the somber gloom that fell from the impending heavens. That humid and
Title:  congenial atmosphere which commonly adorned the view, veiling its harshness,
Title:  and softening its asperities, had disappeared, the northern air poured
Title:  across the waste of water so harsh and unmingled, that nothing was left to
Title:  be conjectured by the eye, or fashioned by the fancy.
Title:  
Title:  The fiercer element had cropped the verdure of the plain, which looked as
Title:  though it were scathed by the consuming lightning. But, here and there, a
Title:  dark green tuft rose in the midst of the desolation; the earliest fruits of
Title:  a soil that had been fattened with human blood. The whole landscape, which,
Title:  seen by a favoring light, and in a genial temperature, had been found so
Title:  lovely, appeared now like some pictured allegory of life, in which objects
Title:  were arrayed in their harshest but truest colors, and without the relief of
Title:  any shadowing.
Title:  
Title:  The solitary and arid blades of grass arose from the passing gusts fearfully
Title:  perceptible; the bold and rocky mountains were too distinct in their
Title:  barrenness, and the eye even sought relief, in vain, by attempting to pierce
Title:  the illimitable void of heaven, which was shut to its gaze by the dusky
Title:  sheet of ragged and driving vapor.
Title:  
Title:  The wind blew unequally; sometimes sweeping heavily along the ground,
Title:  seeming to whisper its moanings in the cold ears of the dead, then rising in
Title:  a shrill and mournful whistling, it entered the forest with a rush that
Title:  filled the air with the leaves and branches it scattered in its path. Amid
Title:  the unnatural shower, a few hungry ravens struggled with the gale; but no
Title:  sooner was the green ocean of woods which stretched beneath them, passed,
Title:  than they gladly stopped, at random, to their hideous banquet.
Title:  
Title:  In short, it was a scene of wildness and desolation; and it appeared as if
Title:  all who had profanely entered it had been stricken, at a blow, by the
Title:  relentless arm of death. But the prohibition had ceased; and for the first
Title:  time since the perpetrators of those foul deeds which had assisted to
Title:  disfigure the scene were gone, living human beings had now presumed to
Title:  approach the place.
Title:  
Title:  About an hour before the setting of the sun, on the day already mentioned,
Title:  the forms of five men might have been seen issuing from the narrow vista of
Title:  trees, where the path to the Hudson entered the forest, and advancing in the
Title:  direction of the ruined works. At first their progress was slow and guarded,
Title:  as though they entered with reluctance amid the horrors of the post, or
Title:  dreaded the renewal of its frightful incidents. A light figure preceded the
Title:  rest of the party, with the caution and activity of a native; ascending
Title:  every hillock to reconnoiter, and indicating by gestures, to his companions,
Title:  the route he deemed it most prudent to pursue. Nor were those in the rear
Title:  wanting in every caution and foresight known to forest warfare. One among
Title:  them, he also was an Indian, moved a little on one flank, and watched the
Title:  margin of the woods, with eyes long accustomed to read the smallest sign of
Title:  danger. The remaining three were white, though clad in vestments adapted,
Title:  both in quality and color, to their present hazardous pursuit - that of
Title:  hanging on the skirts of a retiring army in the wilderness.
Title:  
Title:  The effects produced by the appalling sights that constantly arose in their
Title:  path to the lake shore, were as different as the characters of the
Title:  respective individuals who composed the party. The youth in front threw
Title:  serious but furtive glances at the mangled victims, as he stepped lightly
Title:  across the plain, afraid to exhibit his feelings, and yet too inexperienced
Title:  to quell entirely their sudden and powerful influence. His red associate,
Title:  however, was superior to such a weakness. He passed the groups of dead with
Title:  a steadiness of purpose, and an eye so calm, that nothing but long and
Title:  inveterate practise could enable him to maintain. The sensations produced in
Title:  the minds of even the white men were different, though uniformly sorrowful.
Title:  One, whose gray locks and furrowed lineaments, blending with a martial air
Title:  and tread, betrayed, in spite of the disguise of a woodsman's dress, a man
Title:  long experienced in scenes of war, was not ashamed to groan aloud, whenever
Title:  a spectacle of more than usual horror came under his view. The young man at
Title:  his elbow shuddered, but seemed to suppress his feelings in tenderness to
Title:  his companion. Of them all, the straggler who brought up the rear appeared
Title:  alone to betray his real thoughts, without fear of observation or dread of
Title:  consequences. He gazed at the most appalling sight with eyes and muscles
Title:  that knew not how to waver, but with execrations so bitter and deep as to
Title:  denote how much he denounced the crime of his enemies.
Title:  
Title:  The reader will perceive at once, in these respective characters, the
Title:  Mohicans, and their white friend, the scout; together with Munro and
Title:  Heyward. It was, in truth, the father in quest of his children, attended by
Title:  the youth who felt so deep a stake in their happiness, and those brave and
Title:  trusty foresters, who had already proved their skill and fidelity through
Title:  the trying scenes related.
Title:  
Title:  When Uncas, who moved in front, had reached the center of the plain, he
Title:  raised a cry that drew his companions in a body to the spot. The young
Title:  warrior had halted over a group of females who lay in a cluster, a confused
Title:  mass of dead. Notwithstanding the revolting horror of the exhibition, Munro
Title:  and Heyward flew toward the festering heap, endeavoring, with a love that no
Title:  unseemliness could extinguish, to discover whether any vestiges of those
Title:  they sought were to be seen among the tattered and many-colored garments.
Title:  The father and the lover found instant relief in the search; though each was
Title:  condemned again to experience the misery of an uncertainty that was hardly
Title:  less insupportable than the most revolting truth. They were standing, silent
Title:  and thoughtful, around the melancholy pile, when the scout approached.
Title:  Eyeing the sad spectacle with an angry countenance, the sturdy woodsman, for
Title:  the first time since his entering the plain, spoke intelligibly and aloud:
Title:  
Title:  I have been on many a shocking field, and have followed a trail of blood for
Title:  weary miles, he said, but never have I found the hand of the devil so plain
Title:  as it is here to be seen! Revenge is an Indian feeling, and all who know me
Title:  know that there is no cross in my veins; but this much will I say - here, in
Title:  the face of heaven, and with the power of the Lord so manifest in this
Title:  howling wilderness - that should these Frenchers ever trust themselves again
Title:  within the range of a ragged bullet, there is one rifle which shall play its
Title:  part so long as flint will fire or powder burn! I leave the tomahawk and
Title:  knife to such as have a natural gift to use them. What say you,
Title:  Chingachgook, he added, in Delaware; shall the Hurons boast of this to their
Title:  women when the deep snows come?
Title:  
Title:  A gleam of resentment flashed across the dark lineaments of the Mohican
Title:  chief; he loosened his knife in his sheath; and then turning calmly from the
Title:  sight, his countenance settled into a repose as deep as if he knew the
Title:  instigation of passion.
Title:  
Title:  Montcalm! Montcalm! continued the deeply resentful and less self-restrained
Title:  scout; they say a time must come when all the deeds done in the flesh will
Title:  be seen at a single look; and that by eyes cleared from mortal infirmities.
Title:  Woe betide the wretch who is born to behold this plain, with the judgment
Title:  hanging about his soul! Ha - as I am a man of white blood, yonder lies a
Title:  red-skin, without the hair of his head where nature rooted it! Look to him,
Title:  Delaware; it may be one of your missing people; and he should have burial
Title:  like a stout warrior. I see it in your eye, Sagamore; a Huron pays for this,
Title:  afore the fall winds have blown away the scent of the blood!
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook approached the mutilated form, and, turning it over, he found
Title:  the distinguishing marks of one of those six allied tribes, or nations, as
Title:  they were called, who, while they fought in the English ranks, were so
Title:  deadly hostile to his own people. Spurning the loathsome object with his
Title:  foot, he turned from it with the same indifference he would have quitted a
Title:  brute carcass. The scout comprehended the action, and very deliberately
Title:  pursued his own way, continuing, however, his denunciations against the
Title:  French commander in the same resentful strain.
Title:  
Title:  Nothing but vast wisdom and unlimited power should dare to sweep off men in
Title:  multitudes, he added; for it is only the one that can know the necessity of
Title:  the judgment; and what is there, short of the other, that can replace the
Title:  creatures of the Lord? I hold it a sin to kill the second buck afore the
Title:  first is eaten, unless a march in front, or an ambushment, be contemplated.
Title:  It is a different matter with a few warriors in open and rugged fight, for
Title:  'tis their gift to die with the rifle or the tomahawk in hand; according as
Title:  their natures may happen to be, white or red. Uncas, come this way, lad, and
Title:  let the ravens settle upon the Mingo. I know, from often seeing it, that
Title:  they have a craving for the flesh of an Oneida; and it is as well to let the
Title:  bird follow the gift of its natural appetite.
Title:  
Title:  Hugh! exclaimed the young Mohican, rising on the extremities of his feet,
Title:  and gazing intently in his front, frightening the ravens to some other prey
Title:  by the sound and the action.
Title:  
Title:  What is it, boy? whispered the scout, lowering his tall form into a
Title:  crouching attitude, like a panther about to take his leap; God send it be a
Title:  tardy Frencher, skulking for plunder. I do believe killdeer would take an
Title:  uncommon range today!
Title:  
Title:  Uncas, without making any reply, bounded away from the spot, and in the next
Title:  instant he was seen tearing from a bush, and waving in triumph, a fragment
Title:  of the green riding-veil of Cora. The movement, the exhibition, and the cry
Title:  which again burst from the lips of the young Mohican, instantly drew the
Title:  whole party about him.
Title:  
Title:  My child! said Munro, speaking quickly and wildly; give me my child!
Title:  
Title:  Uncas will try, was the short and touching answer.
Title:  
Title:  The simple but meaning assurance was lost on the father, who seized the
Title:  piece of gauze, and crushed it in his hand, while his eyes roamed fearfully
Title:  among the bushes, as if he equally dreaded and hoped for the secrets they
Title:  might reveal.
Title:  
Title:  Here are no dead, sadi Heyward; the storm seems not to have passed this way.
Title:  
Title:  That's manifest; and clearer than the heavens above our heads, returned the
Title:  undisturbed scout; but either she, or they that have robbed her, have passed
Title:  the bush; for I remember the rag she wore to hide a face that all did love
Title:  to look upon. Uncas, you are right; the dark-hair has been here, and she has
Title:  fled like a frightened fawn, to the wood; none who could fly would remain to
Title:  be murdered. Let us search for the marks she left; for, to Indian eyes, I
Title:  sometimes think a humming-bird leaves his trail in the air.
Title:  
Title:  The young Mohican darted away at the suggestion, and the scout had hardly
Title:  done speaking, before the former raised a cry of success from the margin of
Title:  the forest. On reaching the spot, the anxious party perceived another
Title:  portion of the veil fluttering on the lower branch of a beech.
Title:  
Title:  Softly, softly, said the scout, extending his long rifle in front of the
Title:  eager Heyward; we now know our work, but the beauty of the trail must not be
Title:  deformed. A step too soon may give us hours of trouble. We have them,
Title:  though; that much is beyond denial.
Title:  
Title:  Bless ye, bless ye, worthy man! exclaimed Munro; whither then, have they
Title:  fled, and where are my babes?
Title:  
Title:  The path they have taken depends on many chances. If they have gone alone,
Title:  they are quite as likely to move in a circle as straight, and they may be
Title:  within a dozen miles of us; but if the Hurons, or any of the French Indians,
Title:  have laid hands on them, 'tis probably they are now near the borders of the
Title:  Canadas. But what matters that? continued the deliberate scout, observing
Title:  the powerful anxiety and disappointment the listeners exhibited; here are
Title:  the Mohicans and I on one end of the trail, and, rely on it, we find the
Title:  other, though they should be a hundred leagues asunder! Gently, gently,
Title:  Uncas, you are as impatient as a man in the settlements; you forget that
Title:  light feet leave but faint marks!
Title:  
Title:  Hugh! exclaimed Chingachgook, who had been occupied in examining an opening
Title:  that had been evidently made through the low underbrush which skirted the
Title:  forest; and who now stood erect, as he pointed downward, in the attitude and
Title:  with the air of a man who beheld a disgusting serpent.
Title:  
Title:  Here is the palpable impression of the footstep of a man, cried Heyward,
Title:  bending over the indicated spot; he has trod in the margin of this pool, and
Title:  the mark cannot be mistaken. They are captives.
Title:  
Title:  Better so than left to starve in the wilderness, returned the scout; and
Title:  they will leave a wider trail. I would wager fifty beaver skins against as
Title:  many flints, that the Mohicans and I enter their wigwams within the month!
Title:  Stoop to it, Uncas, and try what you can make of the moccasin; for moccasin
Title:  it plainly is, and no shoe.
Title:  
Title:  The young Mohican bent over the track, and removing the scattered leaves
Title:  from around the place, he examined it with much of that sort of scrutiny
Title:  that a money dealer, in these days of pecuniary doubts, would bestow on a
Title:  suspected due-bill. At length he arose from his knees, satisfied with the
Title:  result of the examination.
Title:  
Title:  Well, boy, demanded the attentive scout; what does it say? Can you make
Title:  anything of the tell-tale?
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard Subtil!
Title:  
Title:  Ha! that rampaging devil again! there will never be an end of his loping
Title:  till killdeer has said a friendly word to him.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward reluctantly admitted the truth of this intelligence, and now
Title:  expressed rather his hopes than his doubts by saying:
Title:  
Title:  One moccasin is so much like another, it is probable there is some mistake.
Title:  
Title:  One moccasin like another! you may as well say that one foot is like
Title:  another; though we all know that some are long, and others short; some broad
Title:  and others narrow; some with high, and some with low insteps; some intoed,
Title:  and some out. One moccasin is no more like another than one book is like
Title:  another: though they who can read in one are seldom able to tell the marks
Title:  of the other. Which is all ordered for the best, giving to every man his
Title:  natural advantages. Let me get down to it, Uncas; neither book nor moccasin
Title:  is the worse for having two opinions, instead of one. The scout stooped to
Title:  the task, and instantly added:
Title:  
Title:  You are right, boy; here is the patch we saw so often in the other chase.
Title:  And the fellow will drink when he can get an opportunity; your drinking
Title:  Indian always learns to walk with a wider toe than the natural savage, it
Title:  being the gift of a drunkard to straddle, whether of white or red skin. 'Tis
Title:  just the length and breadth, too! look at it, Sagamore; you measured the
Title:  prints more than once, when we hunted the varmints from Glenn's to the
Title:  health springs.
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook complied; and after finishing his short examination, he arose,
Title:  and with a quiet demeanor, he merely pronounced the word:
Title:  
Title:  Magua!
Title:  
Title:  Ay, 'tis a settled thing; here, then, have passed the dark-hair and Magua.
Title:  
Title:  And not Alice? demanded Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Of her we have not yet seen the signs, returned the scout, looking closely
Title:  around at the trees, the bushes and the ground. What have we there? Uncas,
Title:  bring hither the thing you see dangling from yonder thorn-bush.
Title:  
Title:  When the Indian had complied, the scout received the prize, and holding it
Title:  on high, he laughed in his silent but heartfelt manner.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis the tooting we'pon of the singer! now we shall have a trail a priest
Title:  might travel, he said. Uncas, look for the marks of a shoe that is long
Title:  enough to uphold six feet two of tottering human flesh. I begin to have some
Title:  hopes of the fellow, since he has given up squalling to follow some better
Title:  trade.
Title:  
Title:  At least he has been faithful to his trust, said Heyward. And Cora and Alice
Title:  are not without a friend.
Title:  
Title:  Yes, said Hawkeye, dropping his rifle, and leaning on it with an air of
Title:  visible contempt, he will do their singing. Can he slay a buck for their
Title:  dinner; journey by the moss on the beeches, or cut the throat of a Huron? If
Title:  not, the first catbird1 he meets is the cleverer of the two. Well, boy, any
Title:  signs of such a foundation?
Title:  
Title:  Here is something like the footstep of one who has worn a shoe; can it be
Title:  that of our friend?
Title:  
Title:  Touch the leaves lightly or you'll disconsart the formation. That! that is
Title:  the print of a foot, but 'tis the dark-hair's; and small it is, too, for one
Title:  of such a noble height and grand appearance. The singer would cover it with
Title:  his heel.
Title:  
Title:  Where! let me look on the footsteps of my child, said Munro, shoving the
Title:  bushes aside, and bending fondly over the nearly obliterated impression.
Title:  Though the tread which had left the mark had been light and rapid, it ws
Title:  still plainly visible. The aged soldier examined it with eyes that grew dim
Title:  as he gazed; nor did he rise from this stooping posture until Heyward saw
Title:  that he had watered the trace of his daughter's passage with a scalding
Title:  tear. Willing to divert a distress which threatened each moment to break
Title:  through the restraint of appearances, by giving the veteran something to do,
Title:  the young man said to the scout:
Title:  
Title:  As we now possess these infallible signs, let us commence our march. A
Title:  moment, at such a time, will appear an age to the captives.
Title:  
Title:  It is not the swiftest leaping deer that gives the longest chase, returned
Title:  Hawkeye, without moving his eyes from the different marks that had come
Title:  under his view; we know that the rampaging Huron has passed, and the
Title:  dark-hair, and the singer, but where is she of the yellow locks and blue
Title:  eyes? Though little, and far from being as bold as her sister, she is fair
Title:  to the view, and pleasant in discourse. Has she no friend, that none care
Title:  for her?
Title:  
Title:  God forbid she should ever want hundreds! Are we not now in her pursuit? For
Title:  one, I will never cease the search till she be found.
Title:  
Title:  In that case we may have to journey by different paths; for here she has not
Title:  passed, light and little as her footsteps would be.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward drew back, all his ardor to proceed seeming to vanish on the
Title:  instant. Without attending to this sudden change in the other's humor, the
Title:  scout after musing a moment continued:
Title:  
Title:  There is no woman in this wilderness could leave such a print as that, but
Title:  the dark-hair or her sister. We know that the first has been here, but where
Title:  are the signs of the other? Let us push deeper on the trail, and if nothing
Title:  offers, we must go back to the plain and strike another scent. Move on,
Title:  Uncas, and keep your eyes on the dried leaves. I will watch the bushes,
Title:  while your father shall run with a low nose to the ground. Move on, friends;
Title:  the sun is getting behind the hills.
Title:  
Title:  Is there nothing that I can do? demanded the anxious Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  You? repeated the scout, who, with his red friends, was already advancing in
Title:  the order he had prescribed; yes, you can keep in our rear and be careful
Title:  not to cross the trail.
Title:  
Title:  Before they had proceeded many rods, the Indians stopped, and appeared to
Title:  gaze at some signs on the earth with more than their usual keenness. Both
Title:  father and son spoke quick and loud, now looking at the object of their
Title:  mutual admiration, and now regarding each other with the most unequivocal
Title:  pleasure.
Title:  
Title:  They have found the little foot! exclaimed the scout, moving forward,
Title:  without attending further to his own portion of the duty. What have we here?
Title:  An ambushment has been planted in the spot! No, by the truest rifle on the
Title:  frontiers, here have been them one-sided horses again! Now the whole secret
Title:  is out, and all is plain as the north star at midnight. Yes, here they have
Title:  mounted. There the beasts have been bound to a sapling, in waiting; and
Title:  yonder runs the broad path away to the north, in full sweep for the Canadas.
Title:  
Title:  But still there are no signs of Alice, of the younger Miss Munro, said
Title:  Duncan.
Title:  
Title:  Unless the shining bauble Uncas has just lifted from the ground should prove
Title:  one. Pass it this way, lad, that we may look at it.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward instantly knew it for a trinket that Alice was fond of wearing, and
Title:  which he recollected, with the tenacious memory of a lover, to have seen, on
Title:  the fatal morning of the massacre, dangling from the fair neck of his
Title:  mistress. He seized the highly prized jewel; and as he proclaimed the fact,
Title:  it vanished from the eyes of the wondering scout, who in vain looked for it
Title:  on the ground, long after it was warmly pressed against the beating heart of
Title:  Duncan.
Title:  
Title:  Pshaw! said the disappointed Hawkeye, ceasing to rake the leaves with the
Title:  breech of his rifle; 'tis a certain sign of age, when the sight begins to
Title:  weaken. Such a glittering gewgaw, and not to be seen! Well, well, I can
Title:  squint along a clouded barrel yet, and that is enough to settle all disputes
Title:  between me and the Mingoes. I should like to find the thing, too, if it were
Title:  only to carry it to the right owner, and that would be bringing the two ends
Title:  of what I call a long trail together, for by this time the broad St.
Title:  Lawrence, or perhaps, the Great Lakes themselves, are between us.
Title:  
Title:  So much the more reason why we should not delay our march, returned Heyward;
Title:  let us proceed.
Title:  
Title:  Young blood and hot blood, they say, are much the same thing. We are not
Title:  about to start on a squirrel hunt, or to drive a deer into the Horican, but
Title:  to outlie for days and nights, and to stretch across a wilderness where the
Title:  feet of men seldom go, and where no bookish knowledge would carry you
Title:  through harmless. An Indian never starts on such an expedition without
Title:  smoking over his council-fire; and, though a man of white blood, I honor
Title:  their customs in this particular, seeing that they are deliberate and wise.
Title:  We will, therefore, go back, and light our fire to-night in the ruins of the
Title:  old fort, and in the morning we shall be fresh, and ready to undertake our
Title:  work like men, and not like babbling women or eager boys.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward saw, by the manner of the scout, that altercation would be useless.
Title:  Munro had again sunk into that sort of apathy which had beset him since his
Title:  late overwhelming misfortunes, and from which he was apparently to be roused
Title:  only by some new and powerful excitement. Making a merit of necessity, the
Title:  young man took the veteran by the arm, and followed in the footsteps of the
Title:  Indians and the scout, who had already begun to retrace the path which
Title:  conducted them to the plain.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 The powers of the American mocking-bird are generally known. But the true
Title:  mocking-bird is not found so far north as the state of New York, where it
Title:  has, however, two substitutes of inferior excellence, the catbird, so often
Title:  named by the scout, and the bird vulgarly called ground-thresher. Either of
Title:  these last two birds is superior to the nightingale or the lark, though, in
Title:  general, the American birds are less musical than those of Europe.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 19
Title:  
Title:       Salarino. - Why, I am sure, if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his
Title:       flesh; what's that good for?
Title:  
Title:       Shylock. - To bait fish withal; if it will feed nothing else, it
Title:       will feed my revenge.
Title:  
Title:                                                      MERCHANT OF VENICE
Title:  
Title:  The shades of evening had come to increase the dreariness of the place, when
Title:  the party entered the ruins of William Henry. The scout and his companions
Title:  immediately made their preparations to pass the night there; but with an
Title:  earnestness and sobriety of demeanor that betrayed how much the unusual
Title:  horrors they had just witnessed worked on even their practised feelings. A
Title:  few fragments of rafters were reared against a blackened wall; and when
Title:  Uncas had covered them slightly with brush, the temporary accommodations
Title:  were deemed sufficient. The young Indian point3ed toward his rude hut when
Title:  his labor was ended; and Heyward, who understood the meaning of the silent
Title:  gestures, gently urged Munro to enter. Leaving the bereaved old man alone
Title:  with his sorrows, Duncan immediately returned into the open air, too much
Title:  excited himself to seek the repose he had recommended to his veteran friend.
Title:  
Title:  While Hawkeye and the Indians lighted their fire and took their evening's
Title:  repast, a frugal meal of dried bear's meat, the young man paid a visit to
Title:  that curtain of the dilapidated fort which looked out on the sheet of the
Title:  Horican. The wind had fallen, and th e waves were already rolling on the
Title:  sandy beach beneath him, in a more regular and tempered succession. The
Title:  clouds, as if tired of their furious chase, were breaking asunder; the
Title:  heavier volumes, gathering in black masses about the horizon, while the
Title:  lighter scud still hurried above the water, or eddied among the tops of the
Title:  mountains, like broken flights of birds, hovering around their roosts. Here
Title:  and there, a red and fiery star struggled through the drifting vapor,
Title:  furnishing a lurid gleam of brightness to the dull aspect of the heavens.
Title:  Within the bosom of the encircling hills, an impenetrable darkness had
Title:  already settled; and the plain lay like a vast and deserted charnel-house,
Title:  without omen or whisper to disturb the slumbers of its numerous and hapless
Title:  tenants.
Title:  
Title:  Of this scene, so chillingly in accordance with the past, Duncan stood for
Title:  many minutes a rapt observer. His eyes wandered from the bosom of the mound,
Title:  where the foresters were seated around their glimmering fire, to the fainter
Title:  light which still lingered in the skies, and then rested long and anxiously
Title:  on the embodied gloom, which lay like a dreary void on that side of him
Title:  where the dead reposed. He soon fancied that inexplicable sounds arose from
Title:  the place, though so indistinct and stolen, as to render not only their
Title:  nature but even their existence uncertain. Ashamed of his apprehensions, the
Title:  young man turned toward the water, and strove to divert his attention to the
Title:  mimic stars that dimly glimmered on its moving surface. Still, his
Title:  too-conscious ears performed their ungrateful duty, as if to warn him of
Title:  some lurking danger. At length, a swift trampling seemed, quite audibly, to
Title:  rush athwart the darkness. Unable any longer to quiet his uneasiness, Duncan
Title:  spoke in a low voice to the scout, requesting him to ascend the mound to the
Title:  place where he stood. Hawkeye threw his rifle across an arm and complied,
Title:  but with an air so unmoved and calm, as to prove how much he counted on the
Title:  security of their position.
Title:  
Title:  Listen! said Duncan, when the other placed himself deliberately at his
Title:  elbow; there are suppressed noises on the plain which may show Montcalm has
Title:  not yet entirely deserted his conquest.
Title:  
Title:  Then ears are better than eyes, said the undisturbed scout, who, having just
Title:  deposited a portion of a bear between his grinders, spoke thick and slow,
Title:  like one whose mouth was doubly occupied. I myself saw him caged in Ty, with
Title:  all his host; for your Frenchers, when they have done a clever thing, like
Title:  to get back, and have a dance, or a merry-making, with the women over their
Title:  success.
Title:  
Title:  I know not. An Indian seldom sleeps in war, and plunder may keep a Huron
Title:  here after his tribe has departed. It would be well to extinguish the fire,
Title:  and have a watch - listen! you hear the noise I mean!
Title:  
Title:  An Indian more rarely lurks about the graves. Though ready to slay, and not
Title:  over regardful of the means, he is commonly content with the scalp, unless
Title:  when blood is hot, and temper up; but after spirit is once fairly gone, he
Title:  forgets his enmity, and is willling to let the dead find their natural rest.
Title:  Speaking of spirits, major, are you of opinion that the heaven of a red-skin
Title:  and of us whites will be of one and the same?
Title:  
Title:  No doubt - no doubt. I thought I heard it again! or was it the rustling of
Title:  the leaves in the top of the beech?
Title:  
Title:  For my own part, continued Hawkeye, turning his face for a moment in the
Title:  direction indicated by Heyward, but with a vacant and careless manner, I
Title:  believe that paradise is ordained for happiness; and that men will be
Title:  indulged in it according to their dispositions and gifts. I, therefore,
Title:  judge that a red-skin is not far from the truth when he believes he is to
Title:  find them glorious hunting grounds of which his traditions tell; nor, for
Title:  that matter, do I think it would be any disparagement to a man without a
Title:  cross to pass his time - -
Title:  
Title:  You hear it again? interrupted Duncan.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, ay; when food is scarce, and when food is plenty, a wolf grows bold,
Title:  said the unmoved scout. There would be picking, too, among the skins of the
Title:  devils, if there was light and time for the sport. But, concerning the life
Title:  that is to come, major; I have heard preachers say, in the settlements, that
Title:  heaven was a place of rest. Now, men's minds differ as to their ideas of
Title:  enjoyment. For myself, and I say it with reverence to the ordering of
Title:  Providence, it would be no great indulgence to be kept shut up in those
Title:  mansions of which they preach, having a natural longing for motion and the
Title:  chase.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, who was now made to understand the nature of the noise he had heard,
Title:  answered, with more attention to the subject which the humor of the scout
Title:  had chosen for discussion, by saying:
Title:  
Title:  It is difficult to account for the feelings that may attend the last great
Title:  change.
Title:  
Title:  It would be a change, indeed, for a man who has passed his days in the open
Title:  air, returned the single-minded scout; and who has so often broken his fast
Title:  on the head waters of the Hudson, to sleep within sound of the roaring
Title:  Mohawk. But it is a comfort to know we serve a merciful Master, though we do
Title:  it each after his fashion, and with great tracts of wilderness atween us -
Title:  what goes there?
Title:  
Title:  Is it not the rushing of the wolves you have mentioned?
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye slowly shook his head, and beckoned for Duncan to follow him to a
Title:  spot to which the glare from the fire did not extend. When he had taken this
Title:  precaution, the scout placed himself in an attitude of intense attention and
Title:  listened long and keenly for a repetition of the low sound that had so
Title:  unexpectedly startled him. His vigilance, however, seemed exercised in vain;
Title:  for after a fruitless pause, he whispered to Duncan:
Title:  
Title:  We must give a call to Uncas. The boy has Indian senses, and he may hear
Title:  what is hid from us; for, being a white-skin, I will not deny my nature.
Title:  
Title:  The young Mohican, who was conversing in a low voice with his father,
Title:  started as he heard the moaning of an owl, and, springing on his feet, he
Title:  looked toward the black mounds, as if seeking the place whence the sounds
Title:  proceeded. The scout repeated the call, and in a few moments, Duncan saw the
Title:  figure of Uncas stealing cautiously along the rampart, to the spot where
Title:  they stood.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye explained his wishes in a very few words, which were spoken in the
Title:  Delaware tongue. So soon as Uncas was in possession of the reason why he was
Title:  summoned, he threw himself flat on the turf; where, to the eyes of Duncan,
Title:  he appeared to lie quiet and motionless. Surprised at the immovable attitude
Title:  of the young warrior, and curious to observe the manner in which he employed
Title:  his faculties to obtain the desired information, Heyward advanced a few
Title:  steps, and bent over the dark object on which he had kept his eye riveted.
Title:  Then it was he discovered that the form of Uncas vanished, and that he
Title:  beheld only the dark outline of an inequality in the embankment.
Title:  
Title:  What has become of the Mohican? he demanded of the scout, stepping back in
Title:  amazement; it was here that I saw him fall, and could have sworn that here
Title:  he yet remained.
Title:  
Title:  Hist! speak lower; for we know not what ears are open, and the Mingoes are a
Title:  quick-witted breed. As for Uncas, he is out on the plain, and the Maquas, if
Title:  any such are about us, will find their equal.
Title:  
Title:  You think that Montcalm has not called off all his Indians? Let us give the
Title:  alarm to our companions, that we may stand to our arms. Here are five of us,
Title:  who are not unused to meet an enemy.
Title:  
Title:  Not a word to either, as you value your life. Look at the Sagamore, how like
Title:  a grand Indian chief he sits by the fire. If there are any skulkers out in
Title:  the darkness, they will never discover, by his countenance, that we suspect
Title:  danger at hand.
Title:  
Title:  But they may discover him, and it will prove his death. His person can be
Title:  too plainly seen by the light of that fire, and he will become the first and
Title:  most certain victim.
Title:  
Title:  It is undeniable that now you speak the truth, returned the scout, betraying
Title:  more anxiety than was usual; yet what can be done? A single suspicious look
Title:  might bring on an attack before we are ready to receive it. He knows, by the
Title:  call I gave to Uncas, that we have struck a scent; I will tell him that we
Title:  are on the trail of the Mingoes; his Indian nature will teach him how to
Title:  act.
Title:  
Title:  The scout applied his fingers to his mouth, and raised a low hissing sound,
Title:  that caused Duncan at first to start aside, believing that he heard a
Title:  serpent. The head of Chingachgook was resting on a hand, as he sat musing by
Title:  himself but the moment he had heard the warning of the animal whose name he
Title:  bore, he arose to an upright position, and his dark eyes glanced swiftly and
Title:  keenly on every side of him. With his sudden and, perhaps, involuntary
Title:  movement, every appearance of surprise or alarm ended. His rifle lay
Title:  untouched, and apparently unnoticed, within reach of his hand. The tomahawk
Title:  that he had loosened in his belt for the sake of ease, was even suffered to
Title:  fall from its usual situation to the ground, and his form seemed to sink,
Title:  like that of a man whose nerves and sinews were suffered to relax for the
Title:  purpose of rest. Cunningly resuming his former position, though with a
Title:  change of hands, as if the movement had been made merely to relieve the
Title:  limb, the native awaited the result with a calmness and fortitude that none
Title:  but an Indian warrior would have known how to exercise.
Title:  
Title:  But Heywad saw that while to a less instructed eye the Mohican chief
Title:  appeared to slumber, his nostrils were expanded, his head was turned a
Title:  little to one side, as if to assist the organs of hearing, and that his
Title:  quick and rapid glances ran incessantly over every object within the power
Title:  of his vision.
Title:  
Title:  See the noble fellow! whispered Hawkeye, pressing the arm of Heyward; he
Title:  knows that a look or a motion might disconsart our schemes, and put us at
Title:  the mercy of them imps - -
Title:  
Title:  He was interrupted by the flash and report of a rifle. The air was filled
Title:  with sparks of fire, around that spot where the eyes of Heyward wre still
Title:  fastened, with admiration and wonder. A second look told him that
Title:  Chingachgook had disappeared in the confusion. In the meantime, the scout
Title:  had thrown forward his rifle, like one prepared for service, and awaited
Title:  impatiently the moment when an enemy might rise to view. But with the
Title:  solitary and fruitless attempt made on the life of Chingachgook, the attack
Title:  appeared to have terminated. Once or twice the listeners thought they could
Title:  distinguish the distant rustling of bushes, as bodies of some unknown
Title:  description rushed through them; nor was it long before Hawkeye pointed out
Title:  the scampering of the wolves, as they fled precipitately before the passage
Title:  of some intruder on their proper domains. After an impatient and breathless
Title:  pause, a plunge was heard in the water, and it was immediately followed by
Title:  the report of another rifle.
Title:  
Title:  There goes Uncas! said the scout; the boy bears a smart piece! I know its
Title:  crack, as well as a father knows the language of his child, for I carried
Title:  the gun myself until a better offered.
Title:  
Title:  What can this mean? demanded Duncan, we are watched, and, as it would seem,
Title:  marked for destruction.
Title:  
Title:  Yonder scattered brand can witness that no good was intended, and this
Title:  Indian will testify that no harm has been done, returned the scout, dropping
Title:  his rifle across his arm again, and following Chingachgook, who just then
Title:  reappeared within the circle of light, into the bosom of the work. How is
Title:  it, Sagamore? Are the Mingoes upon us in earnest, or is it only one of those
Title:  reptiles who hang upon the skirts of a war-party, to scalp the dead, go in,
Title:  and make their boast among the squaws of the valient deeds done on the pale
Title:  faces?
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook very quietly resumed his seat; nor did he make any reply, until
Title:  after he had examined the firebrand which had been struck by the bullet that
Title:  had nearly proved fatal to himself. After which he was content to reply,
Title:  holding a single finger up to view, with the English monosyllable:
Title:  
Title:  One.
Title:  
Title:  I thought as much, returned Hawkeye, seating himself; and as he had got the
Title:  cover of the lake afore Uncas pulled upon him, it is more than probable the
Title:  knave will sing his lies about some great ambushment, in which he was
Title:  outlying on the trail of two Mohicans and a white hunter - for the officers
Title:  can be considered as little better than idlers in such a scrimmage. Well,
Title:  let him - let him. There are always some honest men in every nation, though
Title:  heaven knows, too, that they are scarce among the Maquas, to look down an
Title:  upstart when he brags ag'in the face of reason. The varlet sent his lead
Title:  within whistle of your ears, Sagamore.
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook turned a calm and incurious eye toward the place where the ball
Title:  had struck, and then resumed his former attitude, with a composure that
Title:  could not be disturbed by so trifling an incident. Just then Uncas glided
Title:  into the circle, and seated himself at the fire, with the same appearance of
Title:  indifference as was maintained by his father.
Title:  
Title:  Of these several moments Heyward was a deeply interested and wondering
Title:  observer. It appeared to him as though the foresters had some secret means
Title:  of intelligence, which had escaped the vigilance of his own faculties. In
Title:  place of that eager and garrulous narration with which a white youth would
Title:  have endeavored to communicate, and perhaps exaggerate, that which had
Title:  passed out in the darkness of the plain, the young warrior was seemingly
Title:  content to let his deeds speak for themselves. It was, in fact, neither the
Title:  moment nor the occasion for an Indian to boast of his exploits; and it is
Title:  probably that, had Heyward neglected to inquire, not another syllable would,
Title:  just then, have been uttered on the subject.
Title:  
Title:  What has become of our enemy, Uncas? demanded Duncan; we heard your rifle,
Title:  and hoped you had not fired in vain.
Title:  
Title:  The young chief removed a fold of his hunting skirt, and quietly exposed the
Title:  fatal tuft of hair, which he bore as the symbol of victory. Chingachgook
Title:  laid his hand on the scalp, and considered it for a moment with deep
Title:  attention. Then dropping it, with disgust depicted in his strong features,
Title:  he ejaculated:
Title:  
Title:  Oneida!
Title:  
Title:  Oneida! repeated the scout, who was fast losing his interest in the scene,
Title:  in an apathy nearly assimilated to that of his red associates, but who now
Title:  advanced in uncommon earnestness to regard the bloody badge. By the Lord, if
Title:  the Oneidas are outlying upon the trail, we shall by flanked by devils on
Title:  every side of us! Now, to white eyes there is no difference between this bit
Title:  of skin and that of any other Indian, and yet the Sagamore declares it came
Title:  from the poll of a Mingo; nay, he even names the tribe of the poor devil,
Title:  with as much ease as if the scalp was the leaf of a book, and each hair a
Title:  letter. What right have Christian whites to boast of their learning, when a
Title:  savage can read a language that would prove too much for the wisest of them
Title:  all! What say you, lad, of what people was the knave?
Title:  
Title:  Uncas raised his eyes to the face of the scout, and answered, in his soft
Title:  voice:
Title:  
Title:  Oneida.
Title:  
Title:  Oneida, again! when one Indian makes a declaration it is commonly true; but
Title:  when he is supported by his people, set it down as gospel!
Title:  
Title:  The poor fellow has mistaken us for French, said Heyward; or he would not
Title:  have attempted the life of a friend.
Title:  
Title:  He mistake a Mohican in his paint for a Huron! You would be as likely to
Title:  mistake the white-coated grenadiers of Montcalm for the scarlet jackets of
Title:  the Royal Americans, returned the scout. No, no, the sarpent knew his
Title:  errand; nor was there any great mistake in the matter, for there is but
Title:  little love atween a Delaware and a Mingo, let their tribes go out to fight
Title:  for whom they may, in a white quarrel. For that matter, though the Oneidas
Title:  do serve his sacred majesty, who is my sovereign lord and master, I should
Title:  not have deliberated long about letting off killdeer at the imp myself, had
Title:  luck thrown him in my way.
Title:  
Title:  That would have been an abuse of our treaties, and unworthy of your
Title:  character.
Title:  
Title:  When a man consort much with a people, continued Hawkeye, if they were
Title:  honest and he no knave, love will grow up atwixt them. It is true that white
Title:  cunning has managed to throw the tribes into great confusion, as respects
Title:  friends and enemies; so that the Hurons and the Oneidas, who speak the same
Title:  tongue, or what may be called the same, take each other's scalps, and the
Title:  Delawares are divided among themselves; a few hanging about their great
Title:  council-fire on their own river, and fighting on the same side with the
Title:  Mingoes while the greater part are in the Canadas, out of natural enmity to
Title:  the Maquas - thus throwing everything into disorder, and destroying all the
Title:  harmony of warfare. Yet a red natur' is not likely to alter with every shift
Title:  of policy; so that the love atwixt a Mohican and a Mingo is much like the
Title:  regard between a white man and a sarpent.
Title:  
Title:  I regret to hear it; for I had believed those natives who dwelt within our
Title:  boundaries had found us too just and liberal, not to identify themselves
Title:  fully with our quarrels.
Title:  
Title:  Why, I believe it is natur' to give a preference to one's own quarrels
Title:  before those of strangers. Now, for myself, I do love justice; and,
Title:  therefore, I will not say I hate a Mingo, for that may be unsuitable to my
Title:  color and my religion, though I will just repeat, it may have been owing to
Title:  the night that killdeer had no hand in the death of this skulking Oneida.
Title:  
Title:  Then, as if satisfied with the force of his own reasons, whatever might be
Title:  their effect on the opinions of the other disputant, the honest but
Title:  implacable woodsman turned from the fire, content to let the controversy
Title:  slumber. Heyward withdrew to the rampart, too uneasy and too little
Title:  accusomed to the warfare of the woods to remain at ease under the
Title:  possibility of such insidious attacks. Not so, however, with the scout and
Title:  the Mohicans. Those acute and long-practised senses, whose powers so often
Title:  exceed the limits of all ordinary credulity, after having detected the
Title:  danger, had enabled them to ascertain its magnitude and duration. Not one of
Title:  the three appeared in the least to doubt their perfect security, as was
Title:  indicated by the preparations that were soon made to sit in council over
Title:  their future proceedings.
Title:  
Title:  The confusion of nations, and even of tribes, to which Hawkeye allluded,
Title:  existed at that period in the fullest force. The great tie of language, and,
Title:  of course, of a common origin, was severed in many places; and it was one of
Title:  its consequences, that the Delaware and the Mingo (as the people of the Six
Title:  Nations were called) were found fighting in the same ranks, while the latter
Title:  sought the scalp of the Huron, though believed to be the root of his own
Title:  stock. The Delawares were even divided among themselves. Though love for the
Title:  soil which had belonged to his ancestors kept the Sagamore of the Mohicans
Title:  with a small band of followers who were serving at Edward, under the banners
Title:  of the English king, by far the largest portion of his nation were known to
Title:  be in the field as allies of Montcalm. The reader probably knows, if enough
Title:  has not already been gleaned form this narrative, that the Delaware, or
Title:  Lenape, claimed to be the progenitors of that numerous people, who once were
Title:  masters of most of the eastern and northern states of America, of whom the
Title:  community of the Mohicans was an ancient and highly honored member.
Title:  
Title:  It was, of course, with a perfect understanding of the minute and intricate
Title:  interests which had armed friend against friend, and brought natural enemies
Title:  to combat by each other's side, that the scout and his companions now
Title:  disposed themselves to deliberate on the measures that were to govern their
Title:  future movements, amid so many jarring and savage races of men. Duncan knew
Title:  enough of Indian customs to understand the reason that the fire was
Title:  replenished, and why the warriors, not excepting Hawkeye, took their seats
Title:  within the curl of its smoke with so much gravity and decorum. Placing
Title:  himself at an angle of the works, where he might be a spectator of the scene
Title:  without, he awaited the result with as much patience as he could summon.
Title:  
Title:  After a short and impressive pause, Chingachgook lighted a pipe whose bowl
Title:  was curiously carved in one of the soft stones of the country, and whose
Title:  stem was a tube of wood, and commenced smoking. When he had inhaled enough
Title:  of the fragrance of the soothing weed, he passed the instrument into the
Title:  hands of the scout. In this manner the pipe had made its rounds three
Title:  several times, amid the most profound silence, before either of the party
Title:  opened his lips. Then the Sagamore, as the oldest and highest in rank, in a
Title:  few calm and dignified words, proposed the subject for deliberation. He was
Title:  answered by the scout; and Chingachgook rejoined, when the other objected to
Title:  his opinions. But the youthful Uncas continued a silent and respectful
Title:  listener, until Hawkeye, in complaisance, demanded his opinion. Heyward
Title:  gathered from the manners of the different speakers, that the father and son
Title:  espoused one side of a disputed question, while the white man maintained the
Title:  other. The contest gradually grew warmer, until it was quite evident the
Title:  feelings of the speakers began to be somewhat enlisted in the debate.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding the increasing warmth of the amicable contest, the most
Title:  decorous Christian assembly, not even excepting those in which its reverend
Title:  ministers are collected, might have learned a wholesome lesson of moderation
Title:  from the forbearance and courtesy of the disputants. The words of Uncas were
Title:  received with the same deep attention as those which fell from the maturer
Title:  wisdom of his father; and so far from manifesting any impatience, neither
Title:  spoke in reply, until a few moments of silent meditation were, seemingly,
Title:  bestowed in deliberating on what had already been said.
Title:  
Title:  The language of the Mohicans was accompanied by gestures so direct and
Title:  natural that Heyward had but little difficulty in following the thread of
Title:  their argument. On the other hand, the scout was obscure; because from the
Title:  lingering pride of color, he rather affected the cold and artificial manner
Title:  which characterizes all classes of Anglo-Americans when unexcited. By the
Title:  frequency with which the Indians described the marks of a forest trial, it
Title:  was evident they urged a pursuit by land, while the repeated sweep of
Title:  Hawkeye's arm toward the Horican denoted that he was for a passage across
Title:  its waters.
Title:  
Title:  The latter was to every appearance fast losing ground, and the point was
Title:  about to be decided agaisnt him, when he arose to his feet, and shaking off
Title:  his apathy, he suddenly assumed the manner of an Indian, and adopted all the
Title:  arts of native eloquence. Elevating an arm, he pointed out the track of the
Title:  sun, repeating the gesture for every day that was necessary to accomplish
Title:  their objects. Then he delineated a long and painful path, amid rocks and
Title:  water-courses. The age and weakness of the slumbering and unconscious Munro
Title:  were indicated by signs too palpable to be mistaken. Duncan perceived that
Title:  even his own powers were spoken lightly of, as the scout extended his palm,
Title:  and mentioned him by the appellation of the Open Hand - a name his
Title:  liberality had purchased of all the friendly tribes. Then came a
Title:  representation of the light and graceful movements of a canoe, set in
Title:  forcible contrast to the tottering steps of one enfeebled and tired. He
Title:  concluded by pointing to the scalp of the Oneida, and apparently urging the
Title:  necessity of their departing speedily, and in a manner that should leave no
Title:  trail.
Title:  
Title:  The Mohicans listened gravely, and with countenances that reflected the
Title:  sentiments of the speaker. Conviction gradually wrought its influence, and
Title:  toward the close of Hawkeye's speech, his sentences were accompanied by the
Title:  customary exclamation of commendation. In short, Uncas and his father became
Title:  converts to his way of thinking, abandoning their own previously expressed
Title:  opinions with a liberality and candor that, had they been the
Title:  representatives of some great and civilized people, would have infallibly
Title:  worked their political ruin, by destroying forever their reputation for
Title:  consistency.
Title:  
Title:  The instant the matter in discussion was decided, the debate, and everything
Title:  connected with it, except the result appeared to be forgotten. Hawkeye,
Title:  without looking round to read his triumph in applauding eyes, very
Title:  composedly stretched his tall frame before the dying embers, and closed his
Title:  own organs in sleep.
Title:  
Title:  Left now in a measure to themselves, the Mohicans, whose time had been so
Title:  much devoted to the interests of others, seized the moment to devote some
Title:  attention to themselves. Casting off at once the grave and austere demeanor
Title:  of an Indian chief, Chingachgook commenced speaking to his son in the soft
Title:  and playful tones of affection. Uncas gladly met the familiar air of his
Title:  father; and before the hard breathing of the scout announced that he slept,
Title:  a complete change was effected in the manner of his two associates.
Title:  
Title:  It is impossible to describe the music of their language, while thus engaged
Title:  in laughter and endearments, in such a way as to render it intelligible to
Title:  those whose ears have never listened to its melody. The compass of their
Title:  voices, particularly that of the youth, was wonderful - extending from the
Title:  deepest bass to tones that were even feminine in softness. The eyes of the
Title:  father followed the plastic and ingenious movements of the son with open
Title:  delight, and he never failed to smile in reply to the other's contagious but
Title:  low laughter. While under the influence of these gentle and natural
Title:  feelings, no trace of ferocity was to be seen in the softened features of
Title:  the Sagamore. His figured panoply of death looked more like a disguise
Title:  assumed in mockery than a fierce annunciation of a desire to carry
Title:  destruction in his footsteps.
Title:  
Title:  After an hour had passed in the indulgence of their better feelings,
Title:  Chingachgook abruptly announced his desire to sleep, by wrapping his head in
Title:  his blanket and stretching his form on the naked earth. The merriment of
Title:  Uncas instantly ceased; and carefully raking the coals in such a manner that
Title:  they should impart their warmth to his father's feet, the youth sought his
Title:  own pillow among the ruins of the place.
Title:  
Title:  Imbibing renewed confidence from the security of these experienced
Title:  foresters, Heyward soon imitated their example; and long before the night
Title:  had turned, they who lay in the bosom of the ruined work, seemed to slumber
Title:  as heavily as the unconscious multitude whose bones were already beginning
Title:  to bleach on the surrounding plain.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 20
Title:  
Title:       Land of Albania! let me bend mine eyes
Title:       On thee; thou rugged nurse of savage men!
Title:  
Title:                                                          CHILDRE HAROLD
Title:  
Title:  The heavens were still studded with stars, when Hawkeye came to arouse the
Title:  sleepers. Casting aside their cloaks Munro and Heyward were on their feet
Title:  while the woodsman was still making his low calls, at the entrance of the
Title:  rude shelter where they had passed the night. When they issued from beneath
Title:  its concealment, they found the scout awaiting their appearance nigh by, and
Title:  the only salutation between them was the significant gesture for silence,
Title:  made by their sagacious leader.
Title:  
Title:  Think over your prayers, he whispered, as they approached him; for He to
Title:  whom you make them, knows all tongues; that of the heart, as well as those
Title:  of the mouth. But speak not a syllable; it is rare for a white voice to
Title:  pitch itself properly in the woods, as we have seen by the example of that
Title:  miserable devil, the singer. Come, he continued, turning toward a curtain of
Title:  the works; let us get into the ditch on this side, and be regardful to step
Title:  on the stones and fragments of wood as you go.
Title:  
Title:  His companions complied, though to two of them the reasons of this
Title:  extraordinary precaution were yet a mystery. When they were in the low
Title:  cavity that surrounded the earthen fort on three sides, they found that
Title:  passage nearly choked by the ruins. With care and patience, however, they
Title:  succeeded in clambering after the scout, until they reached the sandy shore
Title:  of the Horican.
Title:  
Title:  That's a trail that nothing but a nose can follow, said the satisfied scout,
Title:  looking back along their difficult way; grass is a treacherous carpet for a
Title:  flying party to tread on, but wood and stone take no print from a moccasin.
Title:  Had you worn your armed boots, there might, indeed, have been something to
Title:  fear; but with the deer-skin suitably prepared, a man may trust himself,
Title:  generally, on rocks with safety. Shove in the canoe nigher to the land,
Title:  Uncas; this sand will take a stamp as easily as the butter of the Jarmans on
Title:  the Mohawk. Softly, lad, softly; it must not touch the beach, or the knaves
Title:  will know by what road we have left the place.
Title:  
Title:  The young man observed the precaution; and the scout, laying a board from
Title:  the ruins to the canoe, made a sign for the two officers to enter. When this
Title:  was done, everything was studiously restored to its former disorder; and
Title:  then Hawkeye succeeded in reaching his little birchen vessel, without
Title:  leaving behind him any of those marks which he appeared so much to dread.
Title:  Heyward was silent until the Indians had cautiously paddled the canoe some
Title:  distance from the fort, and within the broad and dark shadows that fell from
Title:  the eastern mountain on the glassy surface of the lake; then he demanded:
Title:  
Title:  What need have we for this stolen and hurried departure?
Title:  
Title:  If the blood of an Oneida could stain such a sheet of pure water as this we
Title:  float on, returned the scout, your two eyes would answer your own question.
Title:  Have you forgotten the skulking reptile Uncas slew?
Title:  
Title:  By no means. But he was said to be alone, and dead men give no cause for
Title:  fear.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, he was alone in his deviltry! but an Indian whose tribe counts so many
Title:  warriors, need seldom fear his blood will run without the death shriek
Title:  coming speedily from some of his enemies.
Title:  
Title:  But our presence - the authority of Colonel Munro - would prove sufficient
Title:  protection against the anger of our allies, especially in a case where the
Title:  wretch so well merited his fate. I trust in Heaven you have not deviated a
Title:  single foot from the direct line of our course with so slight a reason!
Title:  
Title:  Do you think the bullet of that varlet's rifle would have turned aside,
Title:  though his sacred majesty the king had stood in its path? returned the
Title:  stubborn scout. Why did not the grand Frencher, he who is captain-general of
Title:  the Canadas, bury the tomahawks of the Hurons, if a word from a white can
Title:  work so strongly on the natur' of an Indian?
Title:  
Title:  The reply of Heyward was interrupted by a groan from Munro; but after he had
Title:  paused a moment, in deference to the sorrow of his aged friend he resumed
Title:  the subject.
Title:  
Title:  The marquis of Montcalm can only settle that error with his God, said the
Title:  young man solemnly.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, ay, now there is reason in your words, for they are bottomed on religion
Title:  and honesty. There is a vast difference between throwing a regiment of white
Title:  coats atwixt the tribes and the prisoners, and coaxing an angry savage to
Title:  forget he carries a knife and rifle, with words that must begin with calling
Title:  him your son. No, no, continued the scout, looking back at the dim shore of
Title:  William Henry, which was now fast receding, and laughing in his own silent
Title:  but heartfelt manner; I have put a trail of water atween us; and unless the
Title:  imps can make friends with the fishes, and hear who has paddled across their
Title:  basin this fine morning, we shall throw the length of the Horican behind us
Title:  before they have made up their minds which path to take.
Title:  
Title:  With foes in front, and foes in our rear, our journey is like to be one of
Title:  danger.
Title:  
Title:  Danger! repeated Hawkeye, calmly; no, not absolutely of danger; for, with
Title:  vigilant ears and quick eyes, we can manage to keep a few hours ahead of the
Title:  knaves; or, if we must try the rifle, there are three of us who understand
Title:  its gifts as well as any you can name on the borders. No, not of danger; but
Title:  that we shall have what you may call a brisk push of it, is probable; and it
Title:  may happen, a brush, a scrimmage, or some such divarsion, but always where
Title:  covers are good, and ammunition abundant.
Title:  
Title:  It is possible that Heyward's estimate of danger differed in some degree
Title:  from that of the scout, for, instead of replying, he now sat in silence,
Title:  while the canoe glided over several miles of water. Just as the day dawned,
Title:  they entered the narrows of the lake,1 and stole swiftly and cautiously
Title:  among their numberless little islands. It was by this road that Montcalm had
Title:  retired with his army, and the adventurers knew not but he had left some of
Title:  his Indians in ambush, to protect the rear of his forces, and collect the
Title:  stragglers. They, therefore, approached the passage with the customary
Title:  silence of their guarded habits.
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook laid aside his paddle; while Uncas and the scout urged the
Title:  light vessel through crooked and intricate channels, where every foot that
Title:  they advanced exposed them to the danger of some sudden rising on their
Title:  progress. The eyes of the Sagamore moved warily from islet to islet, and
Title:  copse to copse, as the canoe proceeded; and, when a clearer sheet of water
Title:  permitted, his keen vision was bent along the bald rocks and impending
Title:  forests that frowned upon the narrow strait.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, who was a doubly interested spectator, as well from the beauties of
Title:  the place as from the apprehension natural to his situation, was just
Title:  believing that he had permitted the latter to be excited without sufficient
Title:  reason, when the paddle ceased moving, in obedience to a signal from
Title:  Chingachgook.
Title:  
Title:  Hugh! exlaimed Uncas, nearly at the moment that the light tap his father had
Title:  made on the side of the canoe notified them of the vicinity of danger.
Title:  
Title:  What now? asked the scout; the lake is as smooth as if the winds had never
Title:  blown, and I can see along its sheet for miles; there is not so much as the
Title:  black head of a loon dotting the water.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian gravely raised his paddle, and pointed in the direction in which
Title:  his own steady look was riveted. Duncan's eyes followed the motion. A few
Title:  rods in their front lay another of the wooded islets, but it appeared as
Title:  calm and peaceful as if its solitude had never been disturbed by the foot of
Title:  man.
Title:  
Title:  I see nothing, he said, but land and water; and a lovely scene it is.
Title:  
Title:  Hist! interrupted the scout. Ay, Sagamore, there is always a reason for what
Title:  you do. 'Tis but a shade, and yet it is not natural. You see the mist,
Title:  major, that is rising above the island; you can't call it a fog, for it is
Title:  more like a streak of thin cloud - -
Title:  
Title:  It is vapor from the water.
Title:  
Title:  That a child could tell. But what is the edging of blacker smoke that hangs
Title:  along its lower side, and which you may trace down into the thicket of
Title:  hazel? 'Tis from a fire; but one that, in my judgment, has been suffered to
Title:  burn low.
Title:  
Title:  Let us, then, push for the place, and relieve our doubts, said the impatient
Title:  Duncan; the party must be small that can lie on such a bit of land.
Title:  
Title:  If you judge of Indian cunning by the rules you find in books, or by white
Title:  sagacity, they will lead you astray, if not to your death, returned Hawkeye,
Title:  examining the signs of the place with that acuteness which distinguished
Title:  him. If I may be permitted to speak in this matter, it will be to say, that
Title:  we have but two things to choose between: the one is, to return, and give up
Title:  all thoughts of following the Hurons - -
Title:  
Title:  Never! exclaimed Heyward, in a voice far too loud for their circumstances.
Title:  
Title:  Well, well, continued Hawkeye, making a hasty sign to repress his
Title:  impatience; I am much of your mind myself; though I thought it becoming my
Title:  experience to tell the whole. We must, then, make a push, and if the Indians
Title:  or Frenchers are in the narrows, run the gauntlet through these toppling
Title:  mountains. Is there reason in my words, Sagamore?
Title:  
Title:  The Indian made no other answer than by dropping his paddle into the water,
Title:  and urging forward the canoe. As he held the office of directing its course,
Title:  his resolution was sufficiently indicated by the movement. The whole party
Title:  now plied their paddles vigorously, and in a very few moments they had
Title:  reached a point whence they might command an entire view of the northern
Title:  shore of the island, the side that had hitherto been concealed.
Title:  
Title:  There they are, by all the truth of signs, whispered the scout, two canoes
Title:  and a smoke. The knaves haven't yet got their eyes out of the mist, or we
Title:  should hear the accursed whoop. Together, friends! we are leaving them, and
Title:  are already nearly out of whistle of a bullet.
Title:  
Title:  The well-known crack of a rifle, whose ball came skipping along the placid
Title:  surface of the strait, and a shrill yell from the island, interrupted his
Title:  speech, and announced that their passage was discovered. In another instant
Title:  several savages were seen rushing into canoes, which were soon dancing over
Title:  the water in pursuit. These fearful precursors of a coming struggle produced
Title:  no change in the countenances and movements of his three guides, so far as
Title:  Duncan could discover, except that the strokes of their paddles were longer
Title:  and more in unison, and caused the little bark to spring forward like a
Title:  creature possessing life and volition.
Title:  
Title:  Hold them there, Sagamore, said Hawkeye, looking coolly backward over this
Title:  left shoulder, while he still plied his paddle; keep them just there. Them
Title:  Hurons have never a piece in their nation that will execute at this
Title:  distance; but killdeer has a barrel on which a man may calculate.
Title:  
Title:  The scout having ascertained that the Mohicans were sufficient of themselves
Title:  to maintain the requisite distance, deliberately laid aside his paddle, and
Title:  raised the fatal rifle. Three several times he brought the piece to his
Title:  shoulder, and when his companions were expecting its report, he as often
Title:  lowered it to request the Indians would permit their enemies to approach a
Title:  little nigher. At length his accurate and fastidious eye seemed satisfied,
Title:  and, throwing out his left arm on the barrel, he was slowly elevating the
Title:  muzzle, when an exclamation from Uncas, who sat in the bow, once more caused
Title:  him to suspend the shot.
Title:  
Title:  What, now, lad? demanded Hawkeye; you save a Huron from the death-shriek by
Title:  that word; have you reason for what you do?
Title:  
Title:  Uncas pointed toward a rocky shore a little in their front, whence another
Title:  war canoe was darting directly across their course. It was too obvious now
Title:  that their situation was imminently perilous to need the aid of language to
Title:  confirm it. The scout laid aside his rifle, and resumed the paddle, while
Title:  Chingachgook inclined the bows of the canoe a little toward the western
Title:  shore, in order to increase the distance between them and this new enemy. In
Title:  the meantime they were reminded of the presence of those who pressed upon
Title:  their rear, by wild and exulting shouts. The stirring scene awakened even
Title:  Munro from his apathy.
Title:  
Title:  Let us make for the rocks on the main, he said, with the mien of a tired
Title:  soldier, and give battle to the savages. God forbid that I, or those
Title:  attached to me and mine, should ever trust again to the faith of any servant
Title:  of the Louis's!
Title:  
Title:  He who wishes to prosper in Indian warfare, returned the scout, must not be
Title:  too proud to learn from the wit of a native. Lay her more along the land,
Title:  Sagamore; we are doubling on the varlets, and perhaps they may try to strike
Title:  our trail on the long calculation.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye was not mistaken; for when the Huyrons found their course was likely
Title:  to throw them behind their chase they rendered it less direct, until, by
Title:  gradually bearing more and more obliquely, the two canoes were, ere long,
Title:  gliding on parallel lines, within two hundred yards of each other. It now
Title:  became entirely a trial of speed. So rapid was the progress of the light
Title:  vessles, that the lake curled in their front, in miniature waves, and their
Title:  motion became undulating by its own velocity. It was, perhaps, owing to this
Title:  circumstance, in addition to the necessity of keeping every hand employed at
Title:  the paddles, that the Hurons had not immediate recourse to their firearms.
Title:  The exertions of the fugitives were too severe to continue long, and the
Title:  pursuers had the advantage of numbers. Duncan observed with uneasiness, that
Title:  the scout began to look anxiously about him, as if searching for some
Title:  further means of assisting their flight.
Title:  
Title:  Edge her a little more from the sun, Sagamore, said the stubborn woodsman; I
Title:  see the knaves are sparing a man to the rifle. A single broken bone might
Title:  lose us our scalps. Edge more from the sun and we will put the island
Title:  between us.
Title:  
Title:  The expedient was not without its use. A long, low island lay at a little
Title:  distance before them, and, as they closed with it, the chasing canoe was
Title:  compelled to take a side opposite to that on which the pursued passed. The
Title:  scout and his companions did not neglect this advantage, but the instant
Title:  they were hid from observation by the bushes, they redoubled efforts that
Title:  before had seemed prodigious. The two canoes came round the last low point,
Title:  like two coursers at the top of their speed, the fugitives taking the lead.
Title:  This change had brought them nigher to each other, however, while it altered
Title:  their relative positions.
Title:  
Title:  You showed knowledge in the shaping of a birchen bark, Uncas, when you chose
Title:  this from among the Huron canoes, said the scout, smiling, apparently more
Title:  in satisfaction at their superiority in the race than from that prospect of
Title:  final escape which now began to open a little upon them. The imps have put
Title:  all their strength again at the paddles, and we are to struggle for our
Title:  scalps with bits of flattened wood, instead of clouded barrels and true
Title:  eyes. A long stroke, and together, friends.
Title:  
Title:  They are preparing for a shot, said Heyward; and as we are in a line with
Title:  them, it can scarcely fail.
Title:  
Title:  Get you, then, into the bottom of the canoe, returned the scout; you and the
Title:  colonel; it will be so much taken from the size of the mark.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward smiled, as he answered:
Title:  
Title:  It would be but an ill example for the highest in rank to dodge, while the
Title:  warriors were under fire.
Title:  
Title:  Lord! Lord! That is now a white man's courage! exclaimed the scout; and like
Title:  to many of his notions, not to be maintained by reason. Do you think the
Title:  Sagamore, or Uncas, or even I, who am a man without a cross, would
Title:  deliberate about finding a cover in the scrimmage, when an open body would
Title:  do no good? For what have the Frenchers reared up their Quebec, if fighting
Title:  is always to be done in the clearings?
Title:  
Title:  All that you say is very true, my friend, replied Heyward; still, our
Title:  customs must prevent us from doing as you wish.
Title:  
Title:  A volley from the Hurons interrupted the discourse, and as the bullets
Title:  whistled about them, Duncan saw the head of Uncas turned, looking back at
Title:  himself and Munro. Notwithstanding the nearness of the enemy, and his own
Title:  great personal danger, the countenance of the young warrior expressed no
Title:  other emotion, as the former was compelled to think, than amazement at
Title:  finding men willing to encounter so useless an exposure. Chingachgook was
Title:  probably better acquainted with the notions of white men, for he did not
Title:  even cast a glance aside from the riveted look his eye maintained on the
Title:  object by which he governed their course. A ball soon struck the light and
Title:  polished paddle from the hands of the chief, and drove it through the air,
Title:  far in the advance. A shout arose from the Hurons, who seized the
Title:  opportunity to fire another volley. Uncas described an arc in the water with
Title:  his own blade, and as the canoe passed swiftly on, Chingachgook recovered
Title:  his paddle, and flourishing it on high, he gave the war-whoop of the
Title:  Mohicans, and then lent his strength and skill again to the important task.
Title:  
Title:  The clamorous sounds of Le Gros Serpent! La Longue Carabine! Le Cerf Agile!
Title:  burst at once from the canoes behind, and seemed to give new zeal to the
Title:  pursuers. The scout seized killdeer in his left hand, and elevating it about
Title:  his head, he shook it in triumph at his enemies. The savages answered the
Title:  insult with a yell, and immediately another volley succeeded. The bullets
Title:  pattered along the lake, and one even pierced the bark of their little
Title:  vessel. No perceptible emotion could be discovered in the Mohicans during
Title:  this critical moment, their rigid features expressing neither hope nor
Title:  alarm; but the scout again turned his head, and, laughing in his own silent
Title:  manner, he said to Heyward:
Title:  
Title:  The knaves love to hear the sounds of their pieces; but the eye is not to be
Title:  found among the Mingoes that can calculate a true range in a dancing canoe!
Title:  You see the dumb devils have taken off a man to charge, and by the smallest
Title:  measurement that can be allowed, we move three feet to their two!
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, who was not altogether as easy under this nice estimate of distances
Title:  as his companions, was glad to find, however, that owing to their superior
Title:  dexterity, and the diversion among their enemies, they were very sensibly
Title:  obtaining the advantage. The Hurons soon fired again, and a bullet struck
Title:  the blade of Hawkeye's paddle without injury.
Title:  
Title:  That will do, said the scout, examining the slight indentation with a
Title:  curious eye; it would not have cut the skin of an infant, much less of men,
Title:  who, like us, have been blown upon by the heavens in their anger. Now,
Title:  major, if you will try to use this piece of flattened wood, I'll let
Title:  killdeer take a part in the conversation.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward seized the paddle, and applied himself to the work with an eagerness
Title:  that supplied the place of skill, while Hawkeye was engaged in inspecting
Title:  the priming of his rifle. The latter then took a swift aim and fired. The
Title:  Huron in the bows of the leading canoe had risen with a similar object, and
Title:  he now fell backward, suffering his gun to escape from his hands into the
Title:  water. In an instant, however, he recovered his feet, though his gestures
Title:  were wild and bewildered. At the same moment his companions suspended their
Title:  efforts, and the chasing canoes clustered together, and became stationary.
Title:  Chingachgook and Uncas profited by the interval to regain their wind, though
Title:  Duncan continued to work with the most persevering industry. The father and
Title:  son now cast calm but inquiring glances at each other, to learn if either
Title:  had sustained any injury by the fire; for both well knew that no cry or
Title:  exclamation would, in such a moment of necessity have been permitted to
Title:  betray the accident. A few large drops of blood were trickling down the
Title:  shoulder of the Sagamore, who, when he perceived that the eyes of Uncas
Title:  dwelt too long on the sight, raised some water in the hollow of his hand,
Title:  and washing off the stain, was content to manifest, in this simple manner,
Title:  the slightness of the injury.
Title:  
Title:  Softly, softly, major, said the scout, who by this time had reloaded his
Title:  rifle; we are a little too far already for a rifle to put forth its
Title:  beauties, and you see yonder imps are holding a council. Let them come up
Title:  within striking distance - my eye may well be trusted in such a matter - and
Title:  I will trail the varlets the length of the Horican, guaranteeing that not a
Title:  shot of theirs shall, at the worst, more than break the skin, while killdeer
Title:  shall touch the life twice in three times.
Title:  
Title:  We forget our errand, returned the diligent Duncan. For God's sake let us
Title:  profit by this advantage, and increase our distance from the enemy.
Title:  
Title:  Give me my children, said Munro, hoarsely; trifle no longer with a father's
Title:  agony, but restore me my babes.
Title:  
Title:  Long and habitual deference to the mandates of his superiors had taught the
Title:  scout the virtue of obedience. Throwing a last and lingering glance at the
Title:  distant canoes, he laid aside his rifle, and, relieving the wearied Duncan,
Title:  resumed the paddle, which he wielded with sinews that never tired. His
Title:  efforts were seconded by those of the Mohicans and a very few minutes served
Title:  to place such a sheet of water between them and their enemies, that Heyward
Title:  once more breathed freely.
Title:  
Title:  The lake now began to expand, and their route lay along a wide reach, that
Title:  was lined, as before, by high and ragged mountains. But the islands were
Title:  few, and easily avoided. The strokes of the paddles grew more measured and
Title:  regular, while they who plied them continued their labor, after the close
Title:  and deadly chase from which they had just relieved themselves, with as much
Title:  coolness as though their speed had been tried in sport, rather than under
Title:  such pressing, nay, almost desperate, circumstances.
Title:  
Title:  Instead of following the western shore, whither their errand led them, the
Title:  wary Mohican inclined his course more toward those hills behind which
Title:  Montcalm was known to have led his army into the formidable fortress of
Title:  Ticonderoga. As the Hurons, to every appearance, had abandoned the pursuit,
Title:  there was no apparent reason for this excess of caution. It was, however,
Title:  maintained for hours, until they had reached a bay, nigh the northern
Title:  termination of the lake. Here the canoe was driven upon the beach, and the
Title:  whole party landed. Hawkeye and Heyward ascended an adjacent bluff, where
Title:  the former, after considering the expanse of water beneath him, pointed out
Title:  to the latter a small black object, hovering under a headland, at the
Title:  distance of several miles.
Title:  
Title:  Do you see it? demanded the scout. Now, what would you account that spot,
Title:  were you left alone to white experience to find your way through this
Title:  wilderness?
Title:  
Title:  But for its distance and its magnitude, I should suppose it a bird. Can it
Title:  be a living object?
Title:  
Title:  'Tis a canoe of good birchen bark, and paddled by fierce and crafty Mingoes.
Title:  Though Providence has lent to those who inhabit the woods eyes that would be
Title:  needless to men in the settlements, where there are inventions to assist the
Title:  sight, yet no human organs can see all the dangers which at this moment
Title:  circumvent us. These varlets pretend to be bent chiefly on their sun-down
Title:  meal, but the moment it is dark they will be on our trail, as true as hounds
Title:  on the scent. We must throw them off, or our pursuit of Le Renard Subtil may
Title:  be given up. These lakes are useful at times, especially when the game take
Title:  the water, continued the scout, gazing about him with a countenance of
Title:  concern; but they give no cover, except it be to the fishes. God knows what
Title:  the country would be, if the settlements should ever spread far from the two
Title:  rivers. Both hunting and war would lose their beauty.
Title:  
Title:  Let us not delay a moment, without some good and obvious cause.
Title:  
Title:  I little like that smoke, which you may see worming up along the rock above
Title:  the canoe, interrupted the abstracted scout. My life on it, other eyes than
Title:  ours see it, and know its meaning. Well, words will not mend the matter, and
Title:  it is time that we were doing.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye moved away from the lookout, and descended, musing profoundly, to
Title:  the shore. He communicated the result of his observations to his companions,
Title:  in Delaware, and a short and earnest consultation succeeded. When it
Title:  terminated, the three instantly set about executing their new resolutions.
Title:  
Title:  The canoe was lifted from the water, and borne on the shoulders of the
Title:  party, they proceeded into the wood, making as broad and obvious a trail as
Title:  possible. They soon reached the water-course, which they crossed, and,
Title:  continuing onward, until they came to an extensive and naked rock. At this
Title:  point, where their footsteps might be expected to be no longer visible, they
Title:  retraced their route to the brook, walking backward, with the utmost care.
Title:  They now followed the bed of the little stream to the lake, into which they
Title:  immediately launched their canoe again. A low point concealed them from the
Title:  headland, and the margin of the lake was fringed for some distance with
Title:  dense and overhanging bushes. Under the cover of these natural advantages,
Title:  they toiled their way, with patient industry, until the scout pronounced
Title:  that he believed it would be safe once more to land.
Title:  
Title:  The halt continued until evening rendered objects indistinct and uncertain
Title:  to the eye. Then they resumed their route, and, favored by the darkness,
Title:  pushed silently and vigorously toward the western shore. Although the rugged
Title:  outline of mountain, to which they were steering, presented no distinctive
Title:  marks to the eyes of Duncan, the Mohican entered the little haven he had
Title:  selected with the confidence and accuracy of an experienced pilot.
Title:  
Title:  The boat was again lifted and borne into the woods, where it was carefully
Title:  concealed under a pile of brush. The adventurers assumed their arms and
Title:  packs, and the scout announced to Munro and Heyward that he and the Indians
Title:  were at last in readiness to proceed.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 The beauties of Lake George are well known to every American tourist. In
Title:  the height of the mountains which surround it, and in artificial
Title:  accessories, it is inferior to the finest of the Swiss and Italian lakes,
Title:  while in outline and purity of water it is fully their equal; and in the
Title:  number and disposition of its isles and islets much superior to them all
Title:  together. There are said to be some hundreds of islands in a sheet of water
Title:  less than thirty miles long. The narrows, which connect what may be called,
Title:  in truth, two lakes, are crowded with islands to such a degree as to leave
Title:  passages between them frequently of only a few feet in width. The lake
Title:  itself varies in breadth from one to three miles. The state of New York is
Title:  remarkable for the number and beauty of its lakes. One of its frontiers lies
Title:  on the vast sheet of Ontario, while Champlain stretches nearly a hundred
Title:  miles along another. Oneida, Cayuga, Canandaiguia, Seneca, and George, are
Title:  all lakes of thirty miles in length, while those of a size smaller are
Title:  without number. On many of these lakes, there are now beautiful villages,
Title:  and on many of them steamboats.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 21
Title:  
Title:       If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's death.
Title:  
Title:                                                  MERRY WIFES OF WINDSOR
Title:  
Title:  The party had landed on the border of a region that is, even to this day,
Title:  less known to the inhabitants of the States than the deserts of Arabia, or
Title:  the steppes of Tartary. It was the sterile and rugged district which
Title:  separates the tributaries of Champlain from those of the Hudson, the Mohawk,
Title:  and the St. Lawrence. Since the period of our tale the active spirit of the
Title:  country has surrounded it with a belt of rich and thriving settlements,
Title:  though none but the hunter or the savage is ever known even now to penetrate
Title:  its wild recesses.
Title:  
Title:  As Hawkeye and the Mohicans had, however, often traversed the mountains and
Title:  valleys of this vast wilderness, they did not hesitate to plunge into its
Title:  depth, with the freedom of men accustomed to its privations and
Title:  difficulties. For many hours the travelers toiled on their laborious way,
Title:  guided by a star, or following the direction of some water-course, until the
Title:  scout called a halt, and holding a short consultation with the Indians, they
Title:  lighted their fire, and made the usual preparations to pass the remainder of
Title:  the night where they then were.
Title:  
Title:  Imitating the example, and emulating the confidence of their more
Title:  experienced associates, Munro and Duncan slept without fear, if now without
Title:  uneasiness. The dews were suffered to exhale, and the sun had dispersed the
Title:  mists, and was shedding a strong and clear light in the forest, when the
Title:  travelers resumed their journey.
Title:  
Title:  After proceeding a few miles, the progress of Hawkeye, who led the advance,
Title:  became more deliberate and watchful. He often stopped to examine the trees;
Title:  nor did he cross a rivulet without attentively considering the quantity, the
Title:  velocity, and the color of its waters. Distrusting his own judgment, his
Title:  appeals to the opinion of Chingachgook were frequent and earnest. During one
Title:  of these conferences Heyward observed that Uncas stood a patient and silent,
Title:  though, as he imagined, an interested listener. He was strongly tempted to
Title:  address the young chief, and demand his opinion of their progress; but the
Title:  calm and dignified demeanor of the native induced him to believe, that, like
Title:  himself, the other was wholly dependent on the sagacity and intelligence of
Title:  the seniors of the party. At last the scout spoke in English, and at once
Title:  explained the embarrassment of their situation.
Title:  
Title:  When I found that the home path of the Hurons run north, he said, it did not
Title:  need the judgment of many long years to tell that they would follow the
Title:  valleys, and keep atween the waters of the Hudson and the Horican, until
Title:  they might strike the springs of the Canada streams, which would lead them
Title:  into the heart of the country of the Frenchers. Yet here are we, within a
Title:  short range of the Scaroons, and not a sign of a trail have we crossed!
Title:  Human natur' is weak, and it is possible we may not have taken the proper
Title:  scent.
Title:  
Title:  Heaven protect us from such an error! exclaimed Duncan. Let us retrace our
Title:  steps, and examine as we go, with keener eyes. Has Uncas no counsel to offer
Title:  in such a strait?
Title:  
Title:  The young Mohican cast a glance at his father, but, maintaining his quiet
Title:  and reserved mien, he continued silent. Chingachgook had caught the look,
Title:  and motioning with his hand, he bade him speak. The moment this permission
Title:  was accorded, the countenance of Uncas changed from its grave composure to a
Title:  gleam of intelligence and joy. Bounding forward like a deer, he sprang up
Title:  the side of a little acclivity, a few rods in advance, and stood,
Title:  exultingly, over a spot of fresh earth, that looked as though it had been
Title:  recently upturned by the passage of some heavy animal. The eyes of the whole
Title:  party followed the unexpected movement, and read their success in the air of
Title:  triumph that the youth assumed.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis the trail! exclaimed the scout, advancing to the spot; the lad is quick
Title:  of sight and keen of wit for his years.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis extraordinary that he should have withheld his knowledge so long,
Title:  muttered Duncan, at his elbow.
Title:  
Title:  It would have been more wonderful had he spoken without a bidding. No, no;
Title:  your young white, who gathers his learning from books and can measure what
Title:  he knows by the page, may conceit that his knowledge, like his legs, outruns
Title:  that of his fathers', but, where experience is the master, the scholar is
Title:  made to know the value of years, and respects them accordingly.
Title:  
Title:  See! said Uncas, pointing north and south, at the evident marks of the broad
Title:  trail on either side of him, the dark-hair has gone toward the forest.
Title:  
Title:  Hound never ran on a more beautiful scent, responded the scout, dashing
Title:  forward, at once, on the indicated route; we are favored, greatly favored,
Title:  and can follow with high noses. Ay, here are both your waddling beasts: this
Title:  Huron travels like a white general. The fellow is stricken with a judgment,
Title:  and is mad! Look sharp for wheels, Sagamore, he continued, looking back, and
Title:  laughing in his newly awakened satisfaction; we shall soon have the fool
Title:  journeying in a coach, and that with three of the best pair of eyes on the
Title:  borders in his rear.
Title:  
Title:  The spirits of the scout, and the astonishing success of the chase, in which
Title:  a circuitous distance of more than forty miles had been passed, did not fail
Title:  to impart a portion of hope to the whole party. Their advance was rapid; and
Title:  made with as much confidence as a traveler would proceed along a wide
Title:  highway. If a rock, or a rivulet, or a bit of earth harder than common,
Title:  severed the links of the clew they followed, the true eye of the scout
Title:  recovered them at a distance, and seldom rendered the delay of a single
Title:  moment necessary. Their progress was much facilitated by the certainty that
Title:  Magua had found it necessary to journey through the valleys; a circumstance
Title:  which rendered the general direction of the route sure. Nor had the Huron
Title:  entirely neglected the arts uniformly practised by the natives when retiring
Title:  in front of an enemy. False trails and sudden turnings were frequent,
Title:  wherever a brook or the formation of the ground rendered them feasible; but
Title:  his pursuers were rarely deceived, and never failed to detect their error,
Title:  before they had lost either time or distance on the deceptive track.
Title:  
Title:  By the middle of the afternoon they had passed the Scaroons, and were
Title:  following the route of the declining sun. After descending an eminence to a
Title:  low bottom, through which a swift stream glided, they suddenly came to a
Title:  place where the party of Le Renard had made a halt. Extinguished brands were
Title:  lying around a spring, the offals of a deer were scattered about the place,
Title:  and the trees bore evident marks of having been browsed by the horses. At a
Title:  little distance, Heyward discovered, and contemplated with tender emotion,
Title:  the small bower under which he was fain to believe that Cora and Alice had
Title:  reposed. But while the earth was trodden, and the footsteps of both men and
Title:  beasts were so plainly visible around the place, the trail appeared to have
Title:  suddenly ended.
Title:  
Title:  It was easy to follow the tracks of the Narragansetts, but they seemed only
Title:  to have wandered without guides, or any other object than the pursuit of
Title:  food. At length Uncas, who, with his father, had endeavored to trace the
Title:  route of the horses, came upon a sign of their presence that was quite
Title:  recent. Before following the clew, he communicated his success to his
Title:  companions; and while the latter were consulting on the circumstance, the
Title:  youth reappeared, leading the two fillies, with their saddles broken, and
Title:  the housings soiled, as though they had been permitted to run at will for
Title:  several days.
Title:  
Title:  What should this prove? said Duncan, turning pale, and glancing his eyes
Title:  around him, as if he feared the brush and leaves were about to give up some
Title:  horrid secret.
Title:  
Title:  That our march is come to a quick end, and that we are in an enemy's
Title:  country, returned the scout. Had the knave been pressed, and the gentle ones
Title:  wanted horses to keep up with the party, he might have taken their scalps;
Title:  but without an enemy at his heels, and with such rugged beasts as these, he
Title:  would not hurt a hair of their heads. I know your thoughts, and shame be it
Title:  to our color that you have reason for them; but he who thinks that even a
Title:  Mingo would ill-treat a woman, unless it be to tomahawk her, knows nothing
Title:  of Indian natur', or the laws of the woods. No, no; I have heard that the
Title:  French Indians had come into these hills to hunt the moose, and we are
Title:  getting within scent of their camp. Why should they not? The morning and
Title:  evening guns of Ty may be heard any day among these mountains; for the
Title:  Frenchers are running a new line atween the provinces of the king and the
Title:  Canadas. It is true that the horses are here, but the Hurons are gone; let
Title:  us, then, hunt for the path by which they parted.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye and the Mohicans now applied themselves to their task in good
Title:  earnest. A circle of a few hundred feet in circumference was drawn, and each
Title:  of the party took a segment for his portion. The examination, however,
Title:  resulted in no discovery. The impressions of footsteps were numerous, but
Title:  they all appeared like those of men who had wandered about the spot, without
Title:  any design to quit it. Again the scout and his companions made the circuit
Title:  of the halting place, each slowly following the other, until they assembled
Title:  in the center once more, no wiser than when they started.
Title:  
Title:  Such cunning is not without its deviltry, exclaimed Hawkeye, when he met the
Title:  disappointed looks of his assistants.
Title:  
Title:  We must get down to it, Sagamore, beginning at the spring, and going over
Title:  the ground by inches. The Huron shall never brag in his tribe that he has a
Title:  foot which leaves no print.
Title:  
Title:  Setting the example himself, the scout engaged in the scrutiny with renewed
Title:  zeal. Not a leaf was left unturned. The sticks were removed, and the stones
Title:  lifted; for Indian cunning was known frequently to adopt these objects as
Title:  covers, laboring with the utmost patience and industry, to conceal each
Title:  footstep as they proceeded. Still no discovery was made. At length Uncas,
Title:  whose activity had enabled him to achieve his portion of the task the
Title:  soonest, raked the earth across the turbid little rill which ran from the
Title:  spring, and diverted its course into another channel. So soon as its narrow
Title:  bed below the dam was dry, he stooped over it with keen and curious eyes. A
Title:  cry of exultation immediately announced the success of the young warrior.
Title:  The whole party crowded to the spot where Uncas pointed out the impression
Title:  of a moccasin in the moist alluvion.
Title:  
Title:  This lad will be an honor to his people, said Hawkeye, regarding the trail
Title:  with as much admiration as a naturalist would expend on the tusk of a
Title:  mammoth or the rib of a mastodon; ay, and a thorn in the sides of the
Title:  Hurons. Yet that is not the footstep of an Indian! the weight is too much on
Title:  the heel, and the toes are squared, as though one of the French dancers had
Title:  been in, pigeon-winging his tribe! Run back, Uncas, and bring me the size of
Title:  the singer's foot. You will find a beautiful print of it just opposite yon
Title:  rock, agin the hillside.
Title:  
Title:  While the youth was engaged in this commission, the scout and Chingachgook
Title:  were attentively considering the impressions. The measurements agreed, and
Title:  the former unhesitatingly pronounced that the footstep was that of David,
Title:  who had once more been made to exchange his shoes for moccasins.
Title:  
Title:  I can now read the whole of it, as plainly as if I had seen the arts of Le
Title:  Subtil, he added; the singer being a man whose gifts lay chiefly in his
Title:  throat and feet, was made to go first, and the others have trod in his
Title:  steps, imitating their formation.
Title:  
Title:  But, cried Duncan, I see no signs of - -
Title:  
Title:  The gentle ones, interrupted the scout; the varlet has found a way to carry
Title:  them, until he supposed he had thrown any followers off the scent. My life
Title:  on it, we see their pretty little feet again, before many rods go by.
Title:  
Title:  The whole party now proceeded, following the course of the rill, keeping
Title:  anxious eyes on the regular impressions. The water soon flowed into its bed
Title:  again, but watching the ground on either side, the foresters pursued their
Title:  way content with knowing that the trail lay beneath. More than half a mile
Title:  was passed, before the rill rippled close around the base of an extensive
Title:  and dry rock. Here they paused to make sure that the Hurons had not quitted
Title:  the water.
Title:  
Title:  It was fortunate they did so. For the quick and active Uncas soon found the
Title:  impression of a foot on a bunch of moss, where it would seem an Indian had
Title:  inadvertently trodden. Pursuing the direction given by this discovery, he
Title:  entered the neighboring thicket, and struck the trail, as fresh and obvious
Title:  as it had been before they reached the spring. Another shout announced the
Title:  good fortune of the youth to his companions, and at once terminated the
Title:  search.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, it has been planned with Indian judgment, said the scout, when the party
Title:  was assembled around the place, and would have blinded white eyes.
Title:  
Title:  Shall we proceed? demanded Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Softly, softly, we know our path; but it is good to examine the formation of
Title:  things. This is my schooling, major; and if one neglects the book, there is
Title:  little chance of learning from the open land of Providence. All is plain but
Title:  one thing, which is the manner that the knave contrived to get the gentle
Title:  ones along the blind trail. Even a Huron would be too proud to let their
Title:  tender feet touch the water.
Title:  
Title:  Will this assist in explaining the difficulty? said Heyward, pointing toward
Title:  the fragments of a sort of handbarrow, that had been rudely constructed of
Title:  boughs, and bound together with withes, and which now seemed carelessly cast
Title:  aside as useless.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis explained! cried the delighted Hawkeye. If them varlets have passed a
Title:  minute, they have spent hours in striving to fabricate a lying end to their
Title:  trail! Well, I've known them to waste a day in the same manner to as little
Title:  purpose. Here we have three pair of moccasins, and two of little feet. It is
Title:  amazing that any mortal beings can journey on limbs so small! Pass me the
Title:  thong of buckskin, Uncas, and let me take the length of this foot. By the
Title:  Lord, it is no longer than a child's and yet the maidens are tall and
Title:  comely. That Providence is partial in its gifts, for its own wise reasons,
Title:  the best and most contented of us must allow.
Title:  
Title:  The tender limbs of my daughters are unequal to these hardships, said Munro,
Title:  looking at the light footsteps of his children, with a parent's love; we
Title:  shall find their fainting forms in this desert.
Title:  
Title:  Of that there is little cause of fear, returned the scout, slowly shaking
Title:  his head; this is a firm and straight, though a light step, and not over
Title:  long. See, the heel has hardly touched the ground; and there the dark-hair
Title:  has made a little jump, from root to root. No, no; my knowledge for it,
Title:  neither of them was nigh fainting, hereaway. Now, the singer was beginning
Title:  to be footsore and leg-weary, as is plain by his trail. There, you see, he
Title:  slipped; here he has traveled wide and tottered; and there again it looks as
Title:  though he journeyed on snowshoes. Ay, ay, a man who uses his throat
Title:  altogether, can hardly give his legs a proper training.
Title:  
Title:  From such undeniable testimony did the practised woodsman arrive at the
Title:  truth, with nearly as much certainty and precision as if he had been a
Title:  witness of all those events which his ingenuity so easily elucidated.
Title:  Cheered by these assurances, and satisfied by a reasoning that was so
Title:  obvious, while it was so simple, the party resumed its course, after making
Title:  a short halt, to take a hurried repast.
Title:  
Title:  When the meal was ended, the scout cast a glance upward at the setting sun,
Title:  and pushed forward with a rapidity which compelled Heyward and the still
Title:  vigorous Munro to exert all their muscles to equal. Their route now lay
Title:  along the bottom which has already been mentioned. As the Hurons had made no
Title:  further efforts to conceal their footsteps, the progress of the pursuers was
Title:  no longer delayed by uncertainty. Before an hour had elapsed, however, the
Title:  speed of Hawkeye sensibly abated, and his head, instead of maintaining its
Title:  former direct and forward look, began to turn suspiciously from side to
Title:  side, as if he were conscious of approaching danger. He soon stopped again,
Title:  and waited for the whole party to come up.
Title:  
Title:  I scent the Hurons, he said, speaking to the Mohicans; yonder is open sky,
Title:  through the treetops, and we are getting too nigh their encampment.
Title:  Sagamore, you will take the hillside, to the right; Uncas will bend along
Title:  the brook to the left, while I will try the trail. If anything should
Title:  happen, the call will be three croaks of a crow. I saw one of the birds
Title:  fanning himself in the air, just beyond the dead oak - another sign that we
Title:  are approaching an encampment.
Title:  
Title:  The Indians departed their several ways without reply, while Hawkeye
Title:  cautiously proceeded with the two gentlemen. Heyward soon pressed to the
Title:  side of their guide, eager to catch an early glimpse of those enemies he had
Title:  pursued with so much toil and anxiety. His companion told him to steal to
Title:  the edge of the wood, which, as usual, was fringed with a thicket, and wait
Title:  his coming, for he wished to examine certain suspicious signs a little on
Title:  one side. Duncan obeyed, and soon found himself in a situation to command a
Title:  view which he found as extraordinary as it was novel.
Title:  
Title:  The trees of many acres had been felled, and the glow of a mild summer's
Title:  evening had fallen on the clearing, in beautiful contrast to the gray light
Title:  of the forest. A short distance from the place where Duncan stood, the
Title:  stream had seemingly expanded into a little lake, covering most of the low
Title:  land, from mountain to mountain. The water fell out of this wide basin, in a
Title:  cataract so regular and gentle, that it appeared rather to be the work of
Title:  human hands than fashioned by nature. A hundred earthen dwellings stood on
Title:  the margin of the lake, and even in its waters, as though the latter had
Title:  overflowed its usual banks. Their rounded roofs, admirably molded for
Title:  defense against the weather, denoted more of industry and foresight than the
Title:  natives were wont to bestow on their regular habitations, much less on those
Title:  they occupied for the temporary purposes of hunting and war. In short, the
Title:  whole village or town, whichever it might be termed, possessed more of
Title:  method and neatness of execution, than the white men had been accustomed to
Title:  believe belonged, ordinarily, to the Indian habits. It appeared, however, to
Title:  be deserted. At least, so thought Duncan for many minutes; but, at length,
Title:  he fancied he discovered several human forms advancing toward him on all
Title:  fours, and apparently dragging in the train some heavy, and as he was quick
Title:  to apprehend, some formidable engine. Just then a few dark-looking heads
Title:  gleamed out of the dwellings, and the place seemed suddenly alive with
Title:  beings, which, however, glided from cover to cover so swiftly, as to allow
Title:  no opportunity of examining their humors or pursuits. Alarmed at these
Title:  suspicious and inexplicable movements, he was about to attempt the signal of
Title:  the crows, when the rustling of leaves at hand drew his eyes in another
Title:  direction.
Title:  
Title:  The young man started, and recoiled a few paces instinctively, when he found
Title:  himself within a hundred yards of a stranger Indian. Recovering his
Title:  recollection on the instant, instead of sounding an alarm, which might prove
Title:  fatal to himself, he remained stationary, an attentive observer of the
Title:  other's motions.
Title:  
Title:  An instant of calm observation served to assure Duncan that he was
Title:  undiscovered. The native, like himself, seemed occupied in considering the
Title:  low dwellings of the village, and the stolen movements of its inhabitants.
Title:  It was impossible to discover the expression of his features through the
Title:  grotesque mask of paint under which they were concealed, though Duncan
Title:  fancied it was rather melancholy than savage. His head was shaved, as usual,
Title:  with the exception of the crown, from whose tuft three or four faded
Title:  feathers from a hawk's wing were loosely dangling. A ragged calico mantle
Title:  half encircled his body, while his nether garment was composed of an
Title:  ordinary shirt, the sleeves of which were made to perform the office that is
Title:  usually executed by a much more commodious arrangement. His legs were,
Title:  however, covered with a pair of good deer-skin moccasins. Altogether, the
Title:  appearance of the individual was forlorn and miserable.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan was still curiously observing the person of his neighbor when the
Title:  scout stole silently and cautiously to his side.
Title:  
Title:  You see we have reached their settlement or encampment, whispered the young
Title:  man; and here is one of the savages himself, in a very embarrassing position
Title:  for our further movements.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye started, and dropped his rifle, when, directed by the finger of his
Title:  companion, the stranger came under his view. Then lowering the dangerous
Title:  muzzle he stretched forward his long neck, as if to assist a scrutiny that
Title:  was already intensely keen.
Title:  
Title:  The imp is not a Huron, he said, nor of any of the Canada tribes; and yet
Title:  you see, by his clothes, the knave has been plundering a white. Ay, Montcalm
Title:  has raked the woods for his inroad, and a whooping, murdering set of varlets
Title:  has he gathered together. Can you see where he has put his rifle or his bow?
Title:  
Title:  He appears to have no arms; nor does he seem to be viciously inclined.
Title:  Unless he communicate the alarm to his fellows, who, as you see, are dodging
Title:  about the water, we have but little to fear from him.
Title:  
Title:  The scout turned to Heyward, and regarded him a moment with unconcealed
Title:  amazement. Then opening wide his mouth, he indulged in unrestrained and
Title:  heartfelt laughter, though in that silent and peculiar manner which danger
Title:  had so long taught him to practise.
Title:  
Title:  Repeating the words, Fellows who are dodging about the water! he added, so
Title:  much for schooling and passing a boyhood in the settlements! The knave has
Title:  long legs, though, and shall not be trusted. Do you keep him under your
Title:  rifle while I creep in behind, through the bush, and take him alive. Fire on
Title:  no account.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward had already permitted his companion to bury part of his person in
Title:  the thicket, when, stretching forth his arm, he arrested him, in order to
Title:  ask:
Title:  
Title:  If I see you in danger, may I not risk a shot?
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye regarded him a moment, like one who knew not how to take the
Title:  question; then, nodding his head, he answered, still laughing, though
Title:  inaudibly:
Title:  
Title:  Fire a whole platoon, major.
Title:  
Title:  In the next moment he was concealed by the leaves. Duncan waited several
Title:  minutes in feverish impatience, before he caught another glimpse of the
Title:  scout. Then he reappeared, creeping along the earth, from which his dress
Title:  was hardly distinguishable, directly in the rear of his intended captive.
Title:  Having reached within a few yards of the latter, he arose to his feet,
Title:  silently and slowly. At that instant, several loud blows were struck on the
Title:  water, and Duncan turned his eyes just in time to perceive that a hundred
Title:  dark forms were plunging, in a body, into the troubled little sheet.
Title:  Grasping his rifle his looks were again bent on the Indian near him. Instead
Title:  of taking the alarm, the unconscious savage stretched forward his neck, as
Title:  if he also watched the movements about the gloomy lake, with a sort of silly
Title:  curiosity. In the meantime, the uplifted hand of Hawkeye was above him. But,
Title:  without any apparent reason, it was withdrawn, and its owner indulged in
Title:  another long, though still silent, fit of merriment. When the peculiar and
Title:  hearty laughter of Hawkeye was ended, instead of grasping his victim by the
Title:  throat, he tapped him lightly on the shoulder, and exclaimed aloud:
Title:  
Title:  How now, friend! have you a mind to teach the beavers to sing?
Title:  
Title:  Even so, was the ready answer. It would seem that the Being that gave them
Title:  power to improve His gifts so well, would not deny them voices to proclaim
Title:  His praise.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 22
Title:  
Title:       Bottom: Are we all met?
Title:       Quince: Pat-pat; and here's a marvelous
Title:       Convenient place for our rehearsal.
Title:  
Title:                                                 MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
Title:  
Title:  The reader may better imagine, that we describe the surprise of Heyward. His
Title:  lurking Indians were suddenly converted into four-footed beasts; his lake
Title:  into a beaver pond; his cataract into a dam, constructed by those
Title:  industrious and ingenious quadrupeds; and a suspected enemy into his tried
Title:  friend, David Gamut, the master of psalmody. The presence of the latter
Title:  created so many unexpected hopes relative to the sisters that, without a
Title:  moment's hesitation, the young man broke out of his ambush, and sprang
Title:  forward to join the two principal actors in the scene.
Title:  
Title:  The merriment of Hawkeye was not easily appeased. Without ceremony, and with
Title:  a rough hand, he twirled the supple Gamut around on his heel, and more than
Title:  once affirmed that the Hurons had done themselves great credit in the
Title:  fashion of his costume. Then, seizing the hand of the other, he squeezed it
Title:  with a grip that brought tears into the eyes of the placid David, and wished
Title:  him joy of his new condition.
Title:  
Title:  You were about opening your throat-practisings among the beavers, were ye?
Title:  he said. The cunning devils know half the trade already, for they beat the
Title:  time with their tails, as you heard just now; and in good time it was, too,
Title:  or killdeer might have sounded the first note among them. I have known
Title:  greater fools, who could read and write, than an experienced old beaver; but
Title:  as for squalling, the animals are born dumb! What think you of such a song
Title:  as this?
Title:  
Title:  David shut his sensitive ears, and even Heyward apprised as he was of the
Title:  nature of the cry, looked upward in quest of the bird, as the cawing of a
Title:  crow rang in the air about them.
Title:  
Title:  See! continued the laughing scout, as he pointed toward the remainder of the
Title:  party, who, in obedience to the signal, were already approaching; this is
Title:  music which has its natural virtues; it brings two good rifles to my elbow,
Title:  to say nothing of the knives and tomahawks. But we see that you are safe;
Title:  now tell us what has become of the maidens.
Title:  
Title:  They are captives to the heathen, said David; and, though greatly troubled
Title:  in spirit, enjoying comfort and safety in the body.
Title:  
Title:  Both! demanded the breathless Heyward.
Title:  
Title:  Even so. Though our wayfaring has been sore and our sustenance scanty, we
Title:  have had little other cause for complaint, except the violence done our
Title:  feelings, by being thus led in captivity into a far land.
Title:  
Title:  Bless ye for these very words! exclaimed the trembling Munro; I shall then
Title:  receive my babes, spotless and angel-like, as I lost them!
Title:  
Title:  I know not that their delivery is at hand, returned the doubting David; the
Title:  leader of these savages is possessed of an evil spirit that no power short
Title:  of Omnipotence can tame. I have tried him sleeping and waking, but neither
Title:  sounds nor language seem to touch his soul.
Title:  
Title:  Where is the knave? bluntly interrupted the scout.
Title:  
Title:  He hunts the moose to-day, with his young men; and tomorrow, as I hear, they
Title:  pass further into the forests, and nigher to the borders of Canada. The
Title:  elder maiden is conveyed to a neighboring people, whose lodges are situate
Title:  beyond yonder black pinnacle of rock; while the younger is detained among
Title:  the women of the Hurons, whose dwellings are but two short miles hence, on a
Title:  table-land, where the fire had done the office of the axe, and prepared the
Title:  place for their reception.
Title:  
Title:  Alice, my gentle Alice! murmured Heyward; she has lost the consolation of
Title:  her sister's presence!
Title:  
Title:  Even so. But so far as praise and thanksgiving in psalmody can temper the
Title:  spirit in affliction, she has not suffered.
Title:  
Title:  Has she then a heart for music?
Title:  
Title:  Of the graver and more solemn character; though it must be acknowledged
Title:  that, in spite of all my endeavors, the maiden weeps oftener than she
Title:  smiles. At such moments I forbear to press the holy songs; but there are
Title:  many sweet and comfortable periods of satisfactory communication, when the
Title:  ears of the savages are astounded with the upliftings of our voices.
Title:  
Title:  And why are you permitted to go at large, unwatched?
Title:  
Title:  David composed his features into what he intended should express an air of
Title:  modest humility, before he meekly replied:
Title:  
Title:  Little be the praise to such a worm as I. But, though the power of psalmody
Title:  was suspended in the terrible business of that field of blood through which
Title:  we have passed, it has recovered its influence even over the souls of the
Title:  heathen, and I am suffered to go and come at will.
Title:  
Title:  The scout laughed, and, tapping his own forehead significantly, he perhaps
Title:  explained the singular indulgence more satisfactorily when he said:
Title:  
Title:  The Indians never harm a non-composser. But why, when the path lay open
Title:  before your eyes, did you not strike back on your own trail (it is not so
Title:  blind as that which a squirrel would make), and bring in the tidings to
Title:  Edward?
Title:  
Title:  The scout, remembering only his own sturdy and iron nature, had probably
Title:  exacted a task that David, under no circumstances, could have performed.
Title:  But, without entirely losing the meekness of his air, the latter was content
Title:  to answer:
Title:  
Title:  Though my soul would rejoice to visit the habitations of Christendom once
Title:  more, my feet would rather follow the tender spirits intrusted to my
Title:  keeping, even into the idolatrous province of the Jesuits, than take one
Title:  step backward, while they pined in captivity and sorrow.
Title:  
Title:  Though the figurative language of David wa not very intelligible, the
Title:  sincere and steady expression of his eye, and the glow of his honest
Title:  countenance, were not easily mistaken. Uncas pressed closer to his side, and
Title:  regarded the speaker with a look of commendation, while his father expressed
Title:  his satisfaction by the ordinary pithy exclamation of approbation. The scout
Title:  shook his head as he rejoined:
Title:  
Title:  The Lord never intended that the man should place all his endeavors in his
Title:  throat, to the neglect of other and better gifts! But he has fallen into the
Title:  hands of some silly woman, when he should have been gathering his education
Title:  under a blue sky, among the beauties of the forest. Here, friend; I did
Title:  intend to kindle a fire with this tooting-whistle of thine; but, as you
Title:  value the thing, take it, and blow your best on it.
Title:  
Title:  Gamut received his pitch-pipe with as strong an expression of pleasure as he
Title:  believed compatible with the grave functions he exercised. After essaying
Title:  its virtues repeatedly, in contrast with his own voice, and, satisfying
Title:  himself that none of its melody was lost, he made a very serious
Title:  demonstration toward achieving a few stanzas of one of the longest effusions
Title:  in the little volume so often mentioned.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, however, hastily interrupted his pious purpose by continuing
Title:  questions concerning the past and present condition of his fellow captives,
Title:  and in a manner more methodical than had been permitted by his feelings in
Title:  the opening of their interview. David, though he regarded his treasure with
Title:  longing eyes, was constrained to answer, especially as the venerable father
Title:  took a part in the interrogatories, with an interest too imposing to be
Title:  denied. Nor did the scout fail to throw in a pertinent inquiry, whenever a
Title:  fitting occasion presented. In this manner, though with frequent
Title:  interruptions which were filled with certain threatening sounds from the
Title:  recovered instrument, the pursuers were put in possession of such leading
Title:  circumstances as were likely to prove useful in accomplishing their great
Title:  and engrossing object - the recovery of the sisters. The narrative of David
Title:  was simple, and the facts but few.
Title:  
Title:  Magua had waited on the mountain until a safe moment to retire presented
Title:  itself, when he had descended, and taken the route along the western side of
Title:  the Horican in direction of the Canadas. As the subtle Huron was familiar
Title:  with the paths, and well knew there was no immediate danger of pursuit,
Title:  their progress had been moderate, and far from fatiguing. It appeared from
Title:  the unembellished statement of David, that his own presence had been rather
Title:  endured than desired; though even Magua had not been entirely exempt from
Title:  that veneration with which the Indians regard those whom the Great Spirit
Title:  had visited in their intellects. At night, the utmost care had been taken of
Title:  the captives, both to prevent injury from the damps of the woods and to
Title:  guard against an escape. At the spring, the horses were turned loose, as has
Title:  been seen; and, notwithstanding the remoteness and length of their trail,
Title:  the artifices already named were resorted to, in order to cut off every clue
Title:  to their place of retreat. On their arrival at the encampment of his people,
Title:  Magua, in obedience to a policy seldom departed from, separated his
Title:  prisoners. Cora had been sent to a tribe that temporarily occupied an
Title:  adjacent valley, though David was far too ignorant of the customs and
Title:  history of the natives, to be able to declare anything satisfactory
Title:  concerning their name or character. He only knew that they had not engaged
Title:  in the late expedition against William Henry; that, like the Hurons
Title:  themselves they were allies of Montcalm; and that they maintained an
Title:  amicable, though a watchful intercourse with the warlike and savage people
Title:  whom chance had, for a time, brought in such close and disagreeable contact
Title:  with themselves.
Title:  
Title:  The Mohicans and the scout listened to his interrupted and imperfect
Title:  narrative, with an interest that obviously increased as he proceeded; and it
Title:  was while attempting to explain the pursuits of the community in which Cora
Title:  was detained, that the latter abruptly demanded:
Title:  
Title:  Did you see the fashion of their knives? wee they of English or French
Title:  formation?
Title:  
Title:  My thoughts were bent on no such vanities, but rather mingled in consolation
Title:  with those of the maidens.
Title:  
Title:  The time may come when you will not consider the knife of a savage such a
Title:  despicable vanity, returned the scout, with a strong expression of contempt
Title:  for the other's dullness. Had they held their corn feast - or can you say
Title:  anything of the totems of the tribe?
Title:  
Title:  Of corn, we had many and plentiful feasts; for the grain, being in the milk
Title:  is both sweet to the mouth and comfortable to the stomach. Of totem, I know
Title:  not the meaning; but if it appertaineth in any wise to the art of Indian
Title:  music, it need not be inquired after at their hands. They never join their
Title:  voices in praise, and it would seem that they are among the profanest of the
Title:  idolatrous.
Title:  
Title:  Therein you belie the natur' of an Indian. Even the Mingo adores but the
Title:  true and loving God. 'Tis wicked fabrication of the whites, and I say it to
Title:  the shame of my color that would make the warrior bow down before images of
Title:  his own creation. It is true, they endeavor to make truces to the wicked one
Title:  - as who would not with an enemy he cannot conquer! but they look up for
Title:  favor and assistance to the Great and Good Spirit only.
Title:  
Title:  It may be so, said David; but I have seen strange and fantastic images drawn
Title:  in their paint, of which their admiration and care savored of spiritual
Title:  pride; especially one, and that, too, a foul and loathsome object.
Title:  
Title:  Was it a sarpent? quickly demanded the scout.
Title:  
Title:  Much the same. It was in the likeness of an abject and creeping tortoise.
Title:  
Title:  Hugh! exclaimed both the attentive Mohicans in a breath; while the scout
Title:  shook his head with the air of one who had made an important but by no means
Title:  a pleasing discovery. Then the father spoke, in the language of the
Title:  Delawares, and with a calmness and dignity that instantly arrested the
Title:  attention even of those to whom his words were unintelligible. His gestures
Title:  were impressive, and at times energetic. Once he lifted his arm on high;
Title:  and, as it descended, the action threw aside the folds of his light mantle,
Title:  a finger resting on his breast, as if he would enforce his meaning by the
Title:  attitude. Duncan's eyes followed the movement, and he perceived that the
Title:  animal just mentioned was beautifully, though faintly, worked in blue tint,
Title:  on the swarthy breast of the chief. All that he had ever heard of the
Title:  violent separation of the vast tribes of the Delawares rushed across his
Title:  mind, and he awaited the proper moment to speak, with a suspense that was
Title:  rendered nearly intolerable by his interest in the stake. His wish, however,
Title:  was anticipated by the scout who turned from his red friend, saying:
Title:  
Title:  We have found that which may be good or evil to us, as heaven disposes. The
Title:  Sagamore is of the high blood of the Delawares, and is the great chief of
Title:  their Tortoises! That some of this stock are among the people of whom the
Title:  singer tells us, is plain by his words; and, had he but spent half the
Title:  breath in prudent questions that he has blown away in making a trumpet of
Title:  his throat, we might have known how many warriors they numbered. It is,
Title:  altogether, a dangerous path we move in; for a friend whose face is turned
Title:  from you often bears a bloodier mind than the enemy who seeks your scalp.
Title:  
Title:  Explain, said Duncan.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis a long and melancholy tradition, and one I little like to think of; for
Title:  it is not to be denied that the evil has been mainly done by men with white
Title:  skins. But it has ended in turning the tomahawk of brother against brother,
Title:  and brought the Mingo and the Delaware to travel in the same path.
Title:  
Title:  You, then, suspect it is a portion of that people among whom Cora resides?
Title:  
Title:  The scout nodded his head in assent, though he seemed anxious to waive the
Title:  further discussion of a subject that appeared painful. The impatient Duncan
Title:  now made several hasty and desperate propositions to attempt the release of
Title:  the sisters. Munro seemed to shake off his apathy, and listened to the wild
Title:  schemes of the young man with a deference that his gray hairs and reverend
Title:  years should have denied. But the scout, after suffering the ardor of the
Title:  lover to expend itself a little, found means to convince him of the folly of
Title:  precipitation, in a manner that would require their coolest judgment and
Title:  utmost fortitude.
Title:  
Title:  It would be well, he added, to let this man go in again, as usual, and for
Title:  him to tarry in the lodges, giving notice to the gentle ones of our
Title:  approach, until we call him out, by signal, to consult. You know the cry of
Title:  a crow, friend, from the whistle of the whip-poor-will?
Title:  
Title:  'Tis a pleasing bird, returned David, and has a soft and melancholy note!
Title:  though the time is rather quick and ill-measured.
Title:  
Title:  He speaks of the wish-ton-wish, said the scout; well, since you like his
Title:  whistle, it shall be your signal. Remember, then, when you hear the
Title:  whip-poor-will's call three times repeated, you are to come into the bushes
Title:  where the bird might be supposed - -
Title:  
Title:  Stop, interrupted Heyward; I will accompany him.
Title:  
Title:  You! exclaimed the astonished Hawkeye; are you tired of seeing the sun rise
Title:  and set?
Title:  
Title:  David is a living proof that the Hurons can be merciful.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, but David can use his throat, as no man in his senses would pervart the
Title:  gift.
Title:  
Title:  I too can play the madman, the fool, the hero; in short, any or everything
Title:  to rescue her I love. Name your objections no longer: I am resolved.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye regarded the young man a moment in speechless amazement. But Duncan,
Title:  who, in deference to the other's skill and services, had hitherto submitted
Title:  somewhat implicitly to his dictation, now assumed the superior, with a
Title:  manner that was not easily resisted. He waved his hand, in sign of his
Title:  dislike to all remonstrance, and then, in more tempered language, he
Title:  continued:
Title:  
Title:  You have the means of disguise; change me; paint me, too, if you will; in
Title:  short, alter me to anything - a fool.
Title:  
Title:  It is not for one like me to say that he who is already formed by so
Title:  powerful a hand as Providence, stands in need of a change, muttered the
Title:  discontented scout. When you send your parties abroad in war, you find it
Title:  prudent, at least, to arrange the marks and places of encampment, in order
Title:  that they who fight on your side may know when and where to expect a friend.
Title:  
Title:  Listen, interrupted Duncan; you have heard from this faithful follower of
Title:  the captives, that the Indians are of two tribes, if not of different
Title:  nations. With one, whom you think to be a branch of the Delawares, is she
Title:  you call the dark-hair'; the other, and younger, of the ladies, is
Title:  undeniably with our declared enemies, the Hurons. It becomes my youth and
Title:  rank to attempt the latter adventure. While you, therefore, are negotiating
Title:  with your friends for the release of one of the sisters, I will effect that
Title:  of the other, or die.
Title:  
Title:  The awakened spirit of the young soldier gleamed in his eyes, and his form
Title:  became imposing under its influence. Hawkeye, though too much accustomed to
Title:  Indian artifices not to foresee the danger of the experiment, knew not well
Title:  how to combat this sudden resolution.
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps there was something in the proposal that suited his own hardy
Title:  nature, and that secret love of desperate adventure, which had increased
Title:  with his experience, until hazard and danger had become, in some measure,
Title:  necessary to the enjoyment of his existence. Instead of continuing to oppose
Title:  the scheme of Duncan, his humor suddenly altered, and he lent himself to its
Title:  execution.
Title:  
Title:  Come, he said, with a good-humored smile; the buck that will take to the
Title:  water must be headed, and not followed. Chingachgook has as many different
Title:  paints as the engineer officer's wife, who takes down natur' on scraps of
Title:  paper, making the mountains look like cocks of rusty hay, and placing the
Title:  blue sky in reach of your hand. The Sagamore can use them, too. Seat
Title:  yourself on the log; and my life on it, he can soon make a natural fool of
Title:  you, and that well to your liking.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan complied; and the Mohican, who had been an attentive listener to the
Title:  discourse, readily undertook the office. Long practised in all the subtle
Title:  arts of his race, he drew, with great dexterity and quickness, the fantastic
Title:  shadow that the natives were accustomed to consider as the evidence of a
Title:  friendly and jocular disposition. Every line that could possibly be
Title:  interpreted into a secret inclination for war, was carefully avoided; while,
Title:  on the other hand, he studied those conceits that might be construed into
Title:  amity.
Title:  
Title:  In short, he entirely sacrificed every appearance of the warrior to the
Title:  masquerade of a buffoon. Such exhibitions were not uncommon among the
Title:  Indians, and as Duncan was already sufficiently disguised in his dress,
Title:  there certainly did exist some reason for believing that, with his knowledge
Title:  of French, he might pass for a juggler from Ticonderoga, straggling among
Title:  the allied and friendly tribes.
Title:  
Title:  When he was thought to be sufficiently painted, the scout gave him much
Title:  friendly advice; concerted signals, and appointed the place where they
Title:  should meet, in the event of mutual success. The parting between Munro and
Title:  his young friend was more melancholy; still, the former submitted to the
Title:  separation with an indifference that his warm and honest nature would never
Title:  have permitted in a more healthful state of mind. The scout led Heyward
Title:  aside, and acquainted him with his intention to leave the veteran in some
Title:  safe encampment, in charge of Chingachgook, while he and Uncas pursued their
Title:  inquires among the people they had reason to believe were Delawares. Then,
Title:  renewing his cautions and advice, he concluded by saying, with a solemnity
Title:  and warmth of feeling, with which Duncan was deeply touched:
Title:  
Title:  And, now, God bless you! You have shown a spirit that I like; for it is the
Title:  gift of youth, more especially one of warm blood and a stout heart. But
Title:  believe the warning of a man who has reason to know all he says to be true.
Title:  You will have occasion for your best manhood, and for a sharper wit than
Title:  what is to be gathered in books, afore you outdo the cunning or get the
Title:  better of the courage of a Mingo. God bless you! if the Hurons master your
Title:  scalp, rely on the promise of one who has two stout warriors to back him.
Title:  They shall pay for their victory, with a life for every hair it holds. I
Title:  say, young gentleman, may Providence bless your undertaking, which is
Title:  altogether for good; and, remember, that to outwit the knaves it is lawful
Title:  to practise things that may not be naturally the gift of a white-skin.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan shook his worthy and reluctant associate warmly by the hand, once
Title:  more recommended his aged friend to his care, and returning his good wishes,
Title:  he motioned to David to proceed. Hawkeye gazed after the high-spirited and
Title:  adventurous young man for several moments, in open admiration; then, shaking
Title:  his head doubtingly, he turned, and led his own division of the party into
Title:  the concealment of the forest.
Title:  
Title:  The route taken by Duncan and David lay directly across the clearing of the
Title:  beavers, and along the margin of their pond.
Title:  
Title:  When the former found himself alone with one so simple, and so little
Title:  qualified to render any assistance in desperate emergencies, he first began
Title:  to be sensible of the difficulties of the task he had undertaken. The fading
Title:  light increased the gloominess of the bleak and savage wilderness that
Title:  stretched so far on every side of him, and there was even a fearful
Title:  character in the stillness of those little huts, that he knew were so
Title:  abundantly peopled. It struck him, as he gazed at the admirable structures
Title:  and the wonderful precautions of their sagacious inmates, that even the
Title:  brutes of these vast wilds were possessed of an instinct nearly commensurate
Title:  with his own reason; and he could not reflect, without anxiety, on the
Title:  unequal contest that he had so rashly courted. Then came the glowing image
Title:  of Alice; her distress; her actual danger; and all the peril of his
Title:  situation was forgotten. Cheering David, he moved on with the light and
Title:  vigorous step of youth and enterprise.
Title:  
Title:  After making nearly a semicircle around the pond, they diverged from the
Title:  water-course, and began to ascend to the level of a slight elevation in that
Title:  bottom land, over which they journeyed. Within half an hour they gained the
Title:  margin of another opening that bore all the signs of having been also made
Title:  by the beavers, and which those sagacious animals had probably been induced,
Title:  by some accident, to abandon, for the more eligible position they now
Title:  occupied. A very natural sensation caused Duncan to hesitate a moment,
Title:  unwilling to leave the cover of their bushy path, as a man pauses to collect
Title:  his energies before he essays any hazardous experiment, in which he is
Title:  secretly conscious they will all be needed. He profited by the halt, to
Title:  gather such information as might be obtained from his short and hasty
Title:  glances.
Title:  
Title:  On the opposite side of the clearing, and near the point where the brook
Title:  tumbled over some rocks, from a still higher level, some fifty or sixty
Title:  lodges, rudely fabricated of logs brush, and earth intermingled, were to be
Title:  discovered. They were arranged without any order, and seemed to be
Title:  constructed with very little attention to neatness or beauty. Indeed, so
Title:  very inferior were they in the two latter particulars to the village Duncan
Title:  had just seen, that he began to expect a second surprise, no less
Title:  astonishing that the former. This expectation was is no degree diminished,
Title:  when, by the doubtful twilight, he beheld twenty or thirty forms rising
Title:  alternately from the cover of the tall, coarse grass, in front of the
Title:  lodges, and then sinking again from the sight, as it were to burrow in the
Title:  earth. By the sudden and hasty glimpses that he caught of these figures,
Title:  they seemed more like dark, glancing specters, or some other unearthly
Title:  beings, than creatures fashioned with the ordinary and vulgar materials of
Title:  flesh and blood. A gaunt, naked form was seen, for a single instant, tossing
Title:  its arms wildly in the air, and then the spot it had filled was vacant; the
Title:  figure appearing suddenly in some other and distant place, or being
Title:  succeeded by another, possessing the same mysterious character. David,
Title:  observing that his companion lingered, pursued the direction of his gaze,
Title:  and in some measure recalled the recollection of Heyward, by speaking.
Title:  
Title:  There is much fruitful soil uncultivated here, he said; and, I may add,
Title:  without the sinful leaven of self-commendation, that, since my short sojourn
Title:  in these heathenish abodes, much good seed has been scattered by the
Title:  wayside.
Title:  
Title:  The tribes are fonder of the chase than of the arts of men of labor,
Title:  returned the unconscious Duncan, still gazing at the objects of his wonder.
Title:  
Title:  It is rather joy than labor to the spirit, to lift up the voice in praise;
Title:  but sadly do these boys abuse their gifts. Rarely have I found any of their
Title:  age, on whom nature has so freely bestowed the elements of psalmody; and
Title:  surely, surely, there are none who neglect them more. Three nights have I
Title:  now tarried here, and three several times have I assembled the urchins to
Title:  join in sacred song; and as often have they responded to my efforts with
Title:  whoopings and howlings that have chilled my soul!
Title:  
Title:  Of whom speak you?
Title:  
Title:  Of those children of the devil, who waste the precious moments in yonder
Title:  idle antics. Ah! the wholesome restraint of discipline is but little known
Title:  among this self-abandoned people. In a country of birches, a rod is never
Title:  seen, and it ought not to appear a marvel in my eyes, that the choicest
Title:  blessings of Providence are wasted in such cries as these.
Title:  
Title:  David closed his ears against the juvenile pack, whose yell just then rang
Title:  shrilly through the forest; and Duncan, suffering his lip to curl, as in
Title:  mockery of his own superstition, said firmly:
Title:  
Title:  We will proceed.
Title:  
Title:  Without removing the safeguards form his ears, the master of song complied,
Title:  and together they pursued their way toward what David was sometimes wont to
Title:  call the tents of the Philistines.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 23
Title:  
Title:       But though the beast of game
Title:       The privilege of chase may claim;
Title:       Though space and law the stag we lend
Title:       Ere hound we slip, or bow we bend;
Title:       Who ever recked, where, how, or when
Title:       The prowling fox was trapped or slain?
Title:  
Title:                                                        LADY OF THE LAKE
Title:  
Title:  It is unusual to find an encampment of the natives, like those of the more
Title:  instructed whites, guarded by the presence of armed men. Well informed of
Title:  the approach of every danger, while it is yet at a distance, the Indian
Title:  generally rests secure under his knowledge of the signs of the forest, and
Title:  the long and difficult paths that separate him from those he has most reason
Title:  to dread. But the enemy who, by any lucky concurrence of accidents, has
Title:  found means to elude the vigilance of the scouts, will seldom meet with
Title:  sentinels nearer home to sound the alarm. In addition to this general usage,
Title:  the tribes friendly to the Fench knew too well the weight of the blow that
Title:  had just been struck, to apprehend any immediate danger from the hostile
Title:  nations that were tributary to the crown of Britain.
Title:  
Title:  When Duncan and David, therefore, found themselves in the center of the
Title:  children, who played the antics already mentioned, it was without the least
Title:  previous intimation of their approach. But so soon as they were observed the
Title:  whole of the juvenile pack raised, by common consent, a shrill and warning
Title:  whoop; and then sank, as it were, by magic, from before the sight of their
Title:  visitors. The naked, tawny bodies of the crouching urchins blended so nicely
Title:  at that hour, with the withered herbage, that at first it seemed as if the
Title:  earth had, in truth, swallowed up their forms; though when surprise
Title:  permitted Duncan to bend his look more curiously about the spot, he found it
Title:  everywhere met by dark, quick, and rolling eyeballs.
Title:  
Title:  Gathering no encouragement from this startling presage of the nature of the
Title:  scrutiny he was likely to undergo from the more mature judgments of the men,
Title:  there was an instant when the young soldier would have retreated. It was,
Title:  however, too late to appear to hesitate. The cry of the children had drawn a
Title:  dozen warriors to the door of the nearest lodge, where they stood clustered
Title:  in a dark and savage group, gravely awaiting the nearer approach of those
Title:  who had unexpectedly come among them.
Title:  
Title:  David, in some measure familiarized to the scene, led the way with a
Title:  steadiness that no slight obstacle was likely to disconcert, into this very
Title:  building. It was the principal edifice of the village, though roughly
Title:  constructed of the bark and branches of trees; being the lodge in which the
Title:  tribe held its councils and public meetings during their temporary residence
Title:  on the borders of the English province. Duncan found it difficult to assume
Title:  the necessary appearance of unconcern, as he brushed the dark and powerful
Title:  frames of the savages who thronged its threshold; but, conscious that his
Title:  existence depended on his presence of mind, he trusted to the discretion of
Title:  his companion, whose footsteps he closely followed, endeavoring, as he
Title:  proceeded, to rally his thoughts for the occasion. His blood curdled when he
Title:  found himself in absolute contact with such fierce and implacable enemies;
Title:  but he so far mastered his feelings as to pursue his way into the center of
Title:  the lodge, with an exterior that did not betray the weakness. Imitating the
Title:  example of the deliberate Gamut, he drew a bundle of fragrant brush from
Title:  beneath a pile that filled the corner of the hut, and seated himself in
Title:  silence.
Title:  
Title:  So soon as their visitor had passed, the observant warriors fell back from
Title:  the entrance, and arranging themselves about him, they seemed patiently to
Title:  await the moment when it might comport with the dignity of the stranger to
Title:  speak. By far the greater number stood leaning, in lazy, lounging attitudes,
Title:  against the upright posts that supported the crazy building, while three or
Title:  four of the oldest and most distinguished of the chiefs placed themselves on
Title:  the earth a little more in advance.
Title:  
Title:  A flaring torch was burning in the place, and set its red glare from face to
Title:  face and figure to figure, as it waved in the currents of air. Duncan
Title:  profited by its light to read the probable character of his reception, in
Title:  the countenances of his hosts. But his ingenuity availed him little, against
Title:  the cold artifices of the people he had encountered. The chiefs in front
Title:  scarce cast a glance at his person, keeping their eyes on the ground, with
Title:  an air that might have been intended for respect, but which it was quite
Title:  easy to construe into distrust. The men in the shadow were less reserved.
Title:  Duncan soon detected their searching, but stolen, looks which, in truth,
Title:  scanned his person and attire inch by inch; leaving no emotion of the
Title:  countenance, no gesture, no line of the paint, nor even the fashion of a
Title:  garment, unheeded, and without comment.
Title:  
Title:  At length one whose hair was beginning to be sprinkled with gray, but whose
Title:  sinewy limbs and firm tread announced that he was still equal to the duties
Title:  of manhood, advanced out of the gloom of a corner, whither he had probably
Title:  posted himself to make his observations unseen, and spoke. He used the
Title:  language of the Wyandots, or Hurons; his words were, consequently,
Title:  unintelligible to Heyward, though they seemed, by the gestures that
Title:  accompanied them, to be uttered more in courtesy than anger. The latter
Title:  shook his head, and made a gesture indicative of his inability to reply.
Title:  
Title:  Do none of my brothers speak the French or the English? he said, in the
Title:  former language, looking about him from countenance to countenance, in hopes
Title:  of finding a nod of assent.
Title:  
Title:  Though more than one had turned, as if to catch the meaning of his words,
Title:  they remained unanswered.
Title:  
Title:  I should be grieved to think, continued Duncan, speaking slowly, and using
Title:  the simplest French of which he was the master, to believe that none of this
Title:  wise and brave nation understand the language that the Grand Monarque uses
Title:  when he talks to his children. His heart would be heavy did he believe his
Title:  red warriors paid him so little respect!
Title:  
Title:  A long and grave pause succeeded, during which no movement of a limb, nor
Title:  any expression of an eye, betrayed the expression produced by his remark.
Title:  Duncan, who knew that silence was a virtue among his hosts, gladly had
Title:  recourse to the custom, in order to arrange his ideas. At length the same
Title:  warrior who had before addressed him replied, by dryly demanding, in the
Title:  language of the Canadas:
Title:  
Title:  When our Great Father speaks to his people, is it with the tongue of a
Title:  Huron?
Title:  
Title:  He knows no difference in his children, whether the color of the skin be
Title:  red, or black, or white, returned Duncan, evasively; though chiefly is he
Title:  satisfied with the brave Hurons.
Title:  
Title:  In what manner will he speak, demanded the wary chief, when the runners
Title:  count to him the scalps which five nights ago grew on the heads of the
Title:  Yengeese?
Title:  
Title:  They were his enemies, said Duncan, shuddering involuntarily; and doubtless,
Title:  he will say, it is good; my Hurons are very gallant.
Title:  
Title:  Our Canada father does not think it. Instead of looking foward to reward his
Title:  Indians, his eyes are turned backward. He sees the dead Yengeese, but no
Title:  Huron. What can this mean?
Title:  
Title:  A great chief, like him, has more thoughts than tongues. He looks to see
Title:  that no enemies are on his trail.
Title:  
Title:  The canoe of a dead warrior will not float on the Horican, returned the
Title:  savage, gloomily. His ears are open to the Delawares, who are not our
Title:  friends, and they fill them with lies.
Title:  
Title:  It cannot be. See; he has bid me, who am a man that knows the art of
Title:  healing, to go to his children, the red Hurons of the great lakes, and ask
Title:  if any are sick!
Title:  
Title:  Another silence succeeded this annunciation of the character Duncan had
Title:  assumed. Every eye was simultaneously bent on his person, as if to inquire
Title:  into the truth or falsehood of the declaration, with an intelligence and
Title:  keenness that caused the subject of their scrutiny to tremble for the
Title:  result. He was, however, relieved again by the former speaker.
Title:  
Title:  Do the cunning men of the Canadas paint their skins? the Huron coldly
Title:  continued; we have heard them boast that their faces were pale.
Title:  
Title:  When an Indian chief comes among his white fathers, returned Duncan, with
Title:  great steadiness, he lays aside his buffalo robe, to carry the shirt that is
Title:  offered him. My brothers have given me paint and I wear it.
Title:  
Title:  A low murmur of applause announced that the compliment of the tribe was
Title:  favorably received. The elderly chief made a gesture of commendation, which
Title:  was answered by most of his companions, who each threw forth a hand and
Title:  uttered a brief exclamation of pleasure. Duncan began to breathe more
Title:  freely, believing that the weight of his examination was past; and, as he
Title:  had already prepared a simple and probable tale to support his pretended
Title:  occupation, his hopes of ultimate success grew brighter.
Title:  
Title:  After a silence of a few moments, as if adjusting his thoughts, in order to
Title:  make a suitable answer to the declaration their guests had just given,
Title:  another warrior arose, and placed himself in an attitude to speak. While his
Title:  lips were yet in the act of parting, a low but fearful sound arose from the
Title:  forest, and was immediately succeeded by a high, shrill yell, that was drawn
Title:  out, until it equaled the longest and most plaintive howl of the wolf. The
Title:  sudden and terrible interruption caused Duncan to start from his seat,
Title:  unconscious of everything but the effect produced by so frightful a cry. At
Title:  the same moment, the warriors glided in a body from the lodge, and the outer
Title:  air was filled with loud shouts, that nearly drowned those awful sounds,
Title:  which were still ringing beneath the arches of the woods. Unable to command
Title:  himself any longer, the youth broke from the place, and presently stood in
Title:  the center of a disorderly throng, that included nearly everything having
Title:  life, within the limits of the encampment. Men, women, and children; the
Title:  aged, the inform, the active, and the strong, were alike abroad, some
Title:  exclaiming aloud, others clapping their hands with a joy that seemed
Title:  frantic, and all expressing their savage pleasure in some unexpected event.
Title:  Though astounded, at first, by the uproar, Heyward was soon enabled to find
Title:  its solution by the scene that followed.
Title:  
Title:  There yet lingered sufficient light in the heavens to exhibit those bright
Title:  openings among the tree-tops, where different paths left the clearing to
Title:  enter the depths of the wilderness. Beneath one of them, a line of warriors
Title:  issued from the woods, and advanced slowly toward the dwellings. One in
Title:  front bore a short pole, on which, as it afterwards appeared, were suspended
Title:  several human scalps. The startling sounds that Duncan had heard were what
Title:  the whites have not inappropriately called the death-hallo; and each
Title:  repetition of the cry was intended to announce to the tribe the fate of an
Title:  enemy. Thus far the knowledge of Heyward assisted him in the explanation;
Title:  and as he now knew that the interruption was caused by the unlooked-for
Title:  return of a succcessful war-party, every disagreeable sensation was quieted
Title:  in inward congratulation, for the opportune relief and insignificance it
Title:  conferred on himself.
Title:  
Title:  When at the distance of a few hundred feet from the lodges the newly arrived
Title:  warriors halted. Their plaintive and terrific cry, which was intended to
Title:  represent equally the wailings of the dead and the triumph to the victors,
Title:  had entirely ceased. One of their number now called aloud, in words that
Title:  were far from appalling, though not more intelligible to those for whose
Title:  ears they were intended, than their expressive yells. It would be difficult
Title:  to convey a suitable idea of the savage ecstasy with which the news thus
Title:  imparted was received. The whole encampment, in a moment, became a scene of
Title:  the most violent bustle and commotion. The warriors drew their knives, and
Title:  flourishing them, they arranged themselves in two lines, forming a lane that
Title:  extended from the war-party to the lodges. The squaws seized clubs, axes, or
Title:  whatever weapon of offense first offered itself to their hands, and rushed
Title:  eagerly to act their part in the cruel game that was at hand. Even the
Title:  children would not be excluded; but boys, little able to wield the
Title:  instruments, tore the tomahawks from the belts of their fathers, and stole
Title:  into the ranks, apt imitators of the savage traits exhibited by their
Title:  parents.
Title:  
Title:  Large piles of brush lay scattered about the clearing, and a wary and aged
Title:  squaw was occupied in firing as many as might serve to light the coming
Title:  exhibition. As the flame arose, its power exceeded that of the parting day,
Title:  and assisted to render objects at the same time more distinct and more
Title:  hideous. The whole scene formed a striking picture, whose frame was composed
Title:  of the dark and tall border of pines. The warriors just arrived were the
Title:  most distant figures. A little in advance stood two men, who were apparently
Title:  selected from the rest, as the principal actors in what was to follow. The
Title:  light was not strong enough to render their features distinct, though it was
Title:  quite evident that they were governed by very different emotions. While one
Title:  stood erect and firm, prepared to meet his fate like a hero, the other bowed
Title:  his head, as if palsied by terror or stricken with shame. The high-spirited
Title:  Duncan felt a powerful impulse of admiration and pity toward the former,
Title:  though no opportunity could offer to exhibit his generous emotions. He
Title:  watched his slightest movement, however, with eager eyes; and, as he traced
Title:  the fine outline of his admirably proportioned and active frame, he
Title:  endeavored to persuade himself, that, if the powers of man, seconded by such
Title:  noble resolution, could bear one harmless through so severe a trial, the
Title:  youthful captive before him might hope for success in the hazardous race he
Title:  was about to run. Insensibly the young man drew nigher to the swarthy lines
Title:  of the Hurons, and scarcely breathed, so intense became his interest in the
Title:  spectacle. Just then the signal yell was given, and the momentary quiet
Title:  which had preceded it was broken by a burst of cries, that far exceeded any
Title:  before heard. The more abject of the two victims continued motionless; but
Title:  the other bounded from the place at the cry, with the activity and swiftness
Title:  of a deer. Instead of rushing through the hostile lines, as had been
Title:  expected, he just entered the dangerous defile, and before time was given
Title:  for a single blow, turned short, and leaping the heads of a row of children,
Title:  he gained at once the exterior and safer side of the formidable array. The
Title:  artifice was answered by a hundred voices raised in imprecations; and the
Title:  whole of the excited multitude broke from their order, and spread themselves
Title:  about the place in wild confusion.
Title:  
Title:  A dozen blazing piles now shed their lurid brightness on the place, which
Title:  resembled some unhallowed and supernatural arena, in which malicious demons
Title:  had assembled to act their bloody and lawless rites. The forms in the
Title:  background looked like unearthly beings, gliding before the eye, and
Title:  cleaving the air with frantic and unmeaning gestures; while the savage
Title:  passions of such as passed the flames were rendered fearfully distinct by
Title:  the gleams that shot athwart their inflamed visages.
Title:  
Title:  It will easily be understood that, amid such a concourse of vindictive
Title:  enemies, no breathing time was allowed the fugitive. There was a single
Title:  moment when it seemed as if he would have reached the forest, but the whole
Title:  body of his captors threw themselves before him, and drove him back into the
Title:  center of his relentless persecutors. Turning like a headed deer, he shot,
Title:  with the swiftness of an arrow, through a pillar of forked flame, and
Title:  passing the whole multitude harmless, he appeared on the opposite side of
Title:  the clearing. Here, too, he was met and turned by a few of the older and
Title:  more subtle of the Hurons. Once more he tried the throng, as if seeking
Title:  safety in its blindness, and then several moments succeeded, during which
Title:  Duncan believed the active and courageous young stranger was lost.
Title:  
Title:  Nothing could be distinguished but a dark mass of human forms tossed and
Title:  involved in inexplicable confusion. Arms, gleaming knives, and formidable
Title:  clubs, appeared above them, but the blows were evidently given at random.
Title:  The awful effect was heightened by the piercing shrieks of the women and the
Title:  fierce yells of the warriors. Now and then Duncan caught a glimpse of a
Title:  light form cleaving the air in some desperate bound, and he rather hoped
Title:  than believed that the captive yet retained the command of his astonishing
Title:  powers of activity. Suddenly the multitude rolled backward, and approached
Title:  the spot where he himself stood. The heavy body in the rear pressed upon the
Title:  women and children in front, and bore them to the earth. The stranger
Title:  reappeared in the confusion. Human power could not, however, much longer
Title:  endure so severe a trial. Of this the captive seemed conscious. Profiting by
Title:  the momentary opening, he darted from among the warriors, and made a
Title:  desperate, and what seemed to Duncan a final effort to gain the wood. As if
Title:  aware that no danger was to be apprehended from the young soldier, the
Title:  fugitive nearly brushed his person in his flight. A tall and powerful Huron,
Title:  who had husbanded his forces, pressed close upon his heels, and with an
Title:  uplifted arm menaced a fatal blow. Duncan thrust forth a foot, and the shock
Title:  precipitated the eager savage headlong, many feet in advance of his intended
Title:  victim. Thought itself is not quicker than was the motion with which the
Title:  latter profited by the advantage; he turned, gleamed like a meteor again
Title:  before the eyes of Duncan, and, at the next moment, when the latter
Title:  recovered his recollection, and gazed around in quest of the captive, he saw
Title:  him quietly leaning against a small painted post, which stood before the
Title:  door of the principal lodge.
Title:  
Title:  Apprehensive that the part he had taken in the escape might prove fatal to
Title:  himself, Duncan left the place without delay. He followed the crowd, which
Title:  drew nigh the lodges, gloomy and sullen, like any other multitude that had
Title:  been disappointed in an execution. Curiosity, or perhaps a better feeling,
Title:  induced him to approach the stranger. He found him, standing with one arm
Title:  cast about the protecting post, and breathing thick and hard, after his
Title:  exertions, but disdaining to permit a single sign of suffering to escape.
Title:  His person was now protected by immemorial and sacred usage, until the tribe
Title:  in council had deliberated and determined on his fate. It was not difficult,
Title:  however, to foretell the result, if any presage could be drawn from the
Title:  feelings of those who crowded the place.
Title:  
Title:  There was no term of abuse known to the Huron vocabulary that the
Title:  disappointed women did not lavishly expend on the successful stranger. They
Title:  flouted at his efforts, and told him, with bitter scoffs, that his feet were
Title:  better than his hands; and that he merited wings, while he knew not the use
Title:  of an arrow or a knife. To all this the captive made no reply; but was
Title:  content to preserve an attitude in which dignity was singularly blended with
Title:  disdain. Exasperated as much by his composure as by his good-fortune, their
Title:  words became unintelligible, and were succeeded by shrill, piercing yells.
Title:  Just then the crafty squaw, who had taken the necessary precaution to fire
Title:  the piles, made her way through the throng, and cleared a place for herself
Title:  in front of the captive. The squalid and withered person of this hag might
Title:  well have obtained for her the character of possessing more than human
Title:  cunning. Throwing back her light vestment, she stretched forth her long,
Title:  skinny arm, in derision, and using the language of the Lenape, as more
Title:  intelligible to the subject of her gibes, she commenced aloud:
Title:  
Title:  Look you, Delaware, she said, snapping her fingers in his face; your nation
Title:  is a race of women, and the hoe is better fitted to your hands than the gun.
Title:  Your squaws are the mothers of deer; but if a bear, or a wildcat, or a
Title:  serpent were born among you, ye would flee. The Huron girls shall make you
Title:  petticoats, and we will find you a husband.
Title:  
Title:  A burst of savage laughter succeeded this attack, during which the soft and
Title:  musical merriment of the younger females strangely chimed with the cracked
Title:  voice of their older and more malignant companion. But the stranger was
Title:  superior to all their efforts. His head was immovable; nor did he betray the
Title:  slightest consciousness that any were present, except when his haughty eye
Title:  rolled toward the dusky forms of the warriors, who stalked in the background
Title:  silent and sullen observers of the scene.
Title:  
Title:  Infuriated at the self-command of the captive, the woman placed her arms
Title:  akimbo; and, throwing herself into a posture of defiance, she broke out
Title:  anew, in a torrent of words that no art of ours could commit successfully to
Title:  paper. Her breath was, however, expended in vain; for, although
Title:  distinguished in her nation as a proficient in the art of abuse, she was
Title:  permitted to work herself into such a fury as actually to foam at the mouth,
Title:  without causing a muscle to vibrate in the motionless figure of the
Title:  stranger. The effect of his indifference began to extend itself to the other
Title:  spectators; and a youngster, who was just quitting the condition of a boy to
Title:  enter the state of manhood, attempted to assist the termagant, by
Title:  flourishing his tomahawk before their victim, and adding his empty boasts to
Title:  the taunts of the women. Then, indeed, the captive turned his face toward
Title:  the light, and looked down on the stripling with an expression that was
Title:  superior to contempt. At the next moment he resumed his quiet and reclining
Title:  attitude against the post. But the change of posture had permitted Duncan to
Title:  exchange glances with the firm and piercing eyes of Uncas.
Title:  
Title:  Breathless with amazement, and heavily oppressed with the critical situation
Title:  of his friend, Heyward recoiled before the look, trembling lest its meaning
Title:  might, in some unknown manner, hasten the prisoner's fate. There was not,
Title:  however, any instant cause for such an apprehension. Just then a warrior
Title:  forced his way into the exasperated crowd. Motioning the women and children
Title:  aside with a stern gesture, he took Uncas by the arm, and led him toward the
Title:  door of the council-lodge. Thither all the chiefs, and most of the
Title:  distinguished warriors, followed; among whom the anxious Heyward found means
Title:  to enter without attracting any dangerous attention to himself.
Title:  
Title:  A few minutes were consumed in disposing of those present in a manner
Title:  suitable to their rank and influence in the tribe. An order very similar to
Title:  that adopted in the preceding interview was observed; the aged and superior
Title:  chiefs occupying the area of the spacious apartment, within the powerful
Title:  light of a glaring torch, while their juniors and inferiors were arranged in
Title:  the background, presenting a dark outline of swarthy and marked visages. In
Title:  the very center of the lodge, immediately under an opening that admitted the
Title:  twinkling light of one or two stars, stood Uncas, calm, elevated, and
Title:  collected. His high and haughty carriage was not lost on his captors, who
Title:  often bent their looks on his person, with eyes which, while they lost none
Title:  of their inflexibility of purpose, plainly betrayed their admiration of the
Title:  stranger's daring.
Title:  
Title:  The case was different with the individual whom Duncan had observed to stand
Title:  forth with his friend, previously to the desperate trial of speed; and who,
Title:  instead of joining in the chase, had remained, throughout its turbulent
Title:  uproar, like a cringing statue, expressive of shame and disgrace. Though not
Title:  a hand had been extended to greet him, nor yet an eye had condescended to
Title:  watch his movements, he had also entered the lodge, as though impelled by a
Title:  fate to whose decrees he submitted, seemingly, without a struggle. Heyward
Title:  profited by the first opportunity to gaze in his face, secretly apprehensive
Title:  he might find the features of another acquaintance; but they proved to be
Title:  those of a stranger, and, what was still more inexplicable, of one who bore
Title:  all the distinctive marks of a Huron warrior. Instead of mingling with his
Title:  tribe, however, he sat apart, a solitary being in a multitude, his form
Title:  shrinking into a crouching and abject attitude, as if anxious to fill as
Title:  little space as possible. When each individual had taken his proper station,
Title:  and silence reigned in the place, the gray-haired chief already introduced
Title:  to the reader, spoke aloud, in the language of the Lenni Lenape.
Title:  
Title:  Delaware, he said, though one of a nation of women, you have proved yourself
Title:  a man. I would give you food; but he who eats with a Huron should become his
Title:  friend. Rest in peace till the morning sun, when our last words shall be
Title:  spoken.
Title:  
Title:  Seven nights, and as many summer days, have I fasted on the trail of the
Title:  Hurons, Uncas coldly replied; the children of the Lenape know how to travel
Title:  the path of the just without lingering to eat.
Title:  
Title:  Two of my young men are in pursuit of your companion, resumed the other,
Title:  without appearing to regard the boast of his captive; when they get back,
Title:  then will our wise man say to you live or die.
Title:  
Title:  Has a Huron no ears? scornfully exclaimed Uncas; twice, since he has been
Title:  your prisoner, has the Delaware heard a gun that he knows. Your young men
Title:  will never come back!
Title:  
Title:  A short and sullen pause succeeded this bold assertion. Duncan, who
Title:  understood the Mohican to allude to the fatal rifle of the scout, bent
Title:  forward in earnest observation of the effect it might produce on the
Title:  conquerors; but the chief was content with simply retorting:
Title:  
Title:  If the Lenape are so skillful, why is one of their bravest warriors here?
Title:  
Title:  He followed in the steps of a flying coward, and fell into a snare. The
Title:  cunning beaver may be caught.
Title:  
Title:  As Uncas thus replied, he pointed with his finger toward the solitary Huron,
Title:  but without deigning to bestow any other notice on so unworthy an object.
Title:  The words of the answer and the air of the speaker produced a strong
Title:  sensation among his auditors. Every eye rolled sullenly toward the
Title:  individual indicated by the simple gesture, and a low, threatening murmur
Title:  passed through the crowd. The ominous sounds reached the outer door, and the
Title:  women and children pressing into the throng, no gap had been left, between
Title:  shoulder and shoulder, that was not now filled with the dark lineaments of
Title:  some eager and curious human countenance.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, the more aged chiefs, in the center, communed with each
Title:  other in short and broken sentences. Not a word was uttered that did not
Title:  convey the meaning of the speaker, in the simplest and most energetic form.
Title:  Again, a long and deeply solemn pause took place. It was known, by all
Title:  present, to be the brave precursor of a weighty and important judgment. They
Title:  who composed the outer circle of faces were on tiptoe to gaze; and even the
Title:  culprit for an instant forgot his shame in a deeper emotion, and exposed his
Title:  abject features, in order to cast an anxious and troubled glance at the dark
Title:  assemblage of chiefs. The silence was finally broken by the aged warrior so
Title:  often named. He arose from the earth, and moving past the immovable form of
Title:  Uncas, placed himself in a dignified attitude before the offender. At that
Title:  moment, the withered squaw already mentioned moved into the circle, in a
Title:  slow, sidling sort of a dance, holding the torch, and muttering the
Title:  indistinct words of what might have been a species of incantation. Though
Title:  her presence was altogether an intrusion, it was unheeded.
Title:  
Title:  Approaching Uncas, she held the blazing brand in such a manner as to cast
Title:  its red glare on his person, and to expose the slightest emotion of his
Title:  countenance. The Mohican maintained his firm and haughty attitude; and his
Title:  eyes, so far from deigning to meet her inquisitive look, dwelt steadily on
Title:  the distance, as though it penetrated the obstacles which impeded the view
Title:  and looked into futurity. Satisfied with her examination, she left him, with
Title:  a slight expression of pleasure, and proceeded to practise the same trying
Title:  experiment on her delinquent countryman.
Title:  
Title:  The young Huron was in his war paint, and very little of a finely molded
Title:  form was concealed by his attire. The light rendered every limb and joint
Title:  discernible, and Duncan turned away in horror when he saw they were writhing
Title:  in irrepressible agony. The woman was commencing a low and plaintive howl at
Title:  the sad and shameful spectacle, when the chief put forth his hand and gently
Title:  pushed her aside.
Title:  
Title:  Reed-that-bends, he said, addressing the young culprit by name, and in his
Title:  proper language, though the Great Spirit has made you pleasant to the eyes,
Title:  it would have been better that you had not been born. Your tongue is loud in
Title:  the village, but in battle it is still. None of my young men strike the
Title:  tomahawk deeper into the war- post - none of them so lightly on the
Title:  Yengeese. The enemy know the shape of your back, but they have never seen
Title:  the color of your eyes. Three times have they called on you to come, and as
Title:  often did you forget to answer. Your name will never be mentioned again in
Title:  your tribe - it is already forgotten.
Title:  
Title:  As the chief slowly uttered these words, pausing impressively between each
Title:  sentence, the culprit raised his face, in deference to the other's rank and
Title:  years. Shame, horror, and pride struggled in its lineaments. His eye, which
Title:  was contracted with inward anguish, gleamed on the persons of those whose
Title:  breath was his fame; and the latter emotion for an instant predominated. He
Title:  arose to his feet, and baring his bosom, looked steadily on the keen,
Title:  glittering knife, that was already upheld by his inexorable judge. As the
Title:  weapon passed slowly into his heart he even smiled, as if in joy at having
Title:  found death less dreadful than he had anticipated, and fell heavily on his
Title:  face, at the feet of the rigid and unyielding form of Uncas.
Title:  
Title:  The squaw gave a loud and plaintive yell, dashed the torch to the earth, and
Title:  buried everything in darkness. The whole shuddering group of spectators
Title:  glided from the lodge like troubled sprites; and Duncan thought that he and
Title:  the yet throbbing body of the victim of an Indian judgment had now become
Title:  its only tenants.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 24
Title:  
Title:       Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay
Title:       Dissolve the council, and their chief obey.
Title:  
Title:                                                            POPE'S Iliad
Title:  
Title:  A single moment served to convince the youth that he was mistaken. A hand
Title:  was laid, with a powerful pressure, on his arm, and the low voice of Uncas
Title:  muttered in his ear:
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons are dogs. The sight of a coward's blood can never make a warrior
Title:  tremble. The Gray Head and the Sagamore are safe, and the rifle of Hawkeye
Title:  is not asleep. Go - Uncas and the Open Hand are now strangers. It is enough.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward would gladly have heard more, but a gentle push from his friend
Title:  urged him toward the door, and admonished him of the danger that might
Title:  attend the discovery of their intercourse. Slowly and reluctantly yielding
Title:  to the necessity, he quitted the place, and mingled with the throng that
Title:  hovered nigh. The dying fires in the clearing cast a dim and uncertain light
Title:  on the dusky figures that were silently stalking to and fro; and
Title:  occasionally a brighter gleam than common glanced into the lodge, and
Title:  exhibited the figure of Uncas still maintaining its upright attitude near
Title:  the dead body of the Huron.
Title:  
Title:  A knot of warriors soon entered the place again, and reissuing, they bore
Title:  the senseless remains into the adjacent woods. After this termination of the
Title:  scene, Duncan wandered among the lodges, unquestioned and unnoticed,
Title:  endeavoring to find some trace of her in whose behalf he incurred the risk
Title:  he ran. In the present temper of the tribe it would have been easy to have
Title:  fled and rejoined his companions, had such a wish crossed his mind. But, in
Title:  addition to the never-ceasing anxiety on account of Alice, a fresher though
Title:  feebler interest in the fate of Uncas assisted to chain him to the spot. He
Title:  continued, therefore, to stray from hut to hut, looking into each only to
Title:  encounter additional disappointment, until he had made the entire circuit of
Title:  the village. Abandoning a species of inquiry that proved so fruitless, he
Title:  retraced his steps to the council-lodge, resolved to seek and question
Title:  David, in order to put an end to his doubts.
Title:  
Title:  On reaching the building, which had proved alike the seat of judgment and
Title:  the place of execution, the young man found that the excitement had already
Title:  subsided. The warriors had reassembled, and were now calmly smoking, while
Title:  they conversed gravely on the chief incidents of their recent expedition to
Title:  the head of the Horican. Though the return of Duncan was likely to remind
Title:  them of his character, and the suspicious circumstances of his visit, it
Title:  produced no visible sensation. So far, the terrible scene that had just
Title:  occurred proved favorable to his views, and he required no other prompter
Title:  than his own feelings to convince him of the expediency of profiting by so
Title:  unexpected an advantage.
Title:  
Title:  Without seeming to hesitate, he walked into the lodge, and took his seat
Title:  with a gravity that accorded admirably with the deportment of his hosts. A
Title:  hasty but searching glance sufficed to tell him that, though Uncas still
Title:  remained where he had left him, David had not reappeared. No other restraint
Title:  was imposed on the former than the watchful looks of a young Huron, who had
Title:  placed himself at hand; though an armed warrior leaned against the post that
Title:  formed one side of the narrow doorway. In every other respect, the captive
Title:  seemed at liberty; still he was excluded from all participation in the
Title:  discourse, and possessed much more of the air of some finely molded statue
Title:  than a man having life and volition.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward had too recently witnessed a frightful instance of the prompt
Title:  punishments of the people into whose hands he had fallen to hazard an
Title:  exposure by any officious boldness. He would greatly have preferred silence
Title:  and meditation to speech, when a discovery of his real condition might prove
Title:  so instantly fatal. Unfortunately for this prudent resolution, his
Title:  entertainers appeared otherwise disposed. He had not long occupied the seat
Title:  wisely taken a little in the shade, when another of the elder warriors, who
Title:  spoke the French language, addressed him:
Title:  
Title:  My Canada father does not forget his children, said the chief; I thank him.
Title:  An evil spirit lives in the wife of one of my young men. Can the cunning
Title:  stranger frighten him away?
Title:  
Title:  Heyward possessed some knowledge of the mummery practised among the Indians,
Title:  in the cases of such supposed visitations. He saw, at a glance, that the
Title:  circumstance might possibly be improved to further his own ends. It would,
Title:  therefore, have been difficult, just then to have uttered a proposal that
Title:  would have given him more satisfaction. Aware of the necessity of preserving
Title:  the dignity of his imaginary character, however, he repressed his feelings,
Title:  and answered with suitable mystery:
Title:  
Title:  Spirits differ; some yield to the power of wisdom, while others are too
Title:  strong.
Title:  
Title:  My brother is a great medicine, said the cunning savage; he will try?
Title:  
Title:  A gesture of assent was the answer. The Huron was content with the
Title:  assurance, and, resuming his pipe, he awaited the proper moment to move. The
Title:  impatient Heyward, inwardly execrating the cold customs of the savages,
Title:  which required such sacrifices to appearance, was fain to assume an air of
Title:  indifference, equal to that maintained by the chief, who was, in truth, a
Title:  near relative of the afflicted woman. The minutes lingered, and the delay
Title:  had seemed an hour to the adventurer in empiricism, when the Huron laid
Title:  aside his pipe and drew his robe across his breast, as if about to lead the
Title:  way to the lodge of the invalid. Just then, a warrior of powerful frame,
Title:  darkened the door, and stalking silently among the attentive group, he
Title:  seated himself on one end of the low pile of brush which sustained Duncan.
Title:  The latter cast an impatient look at his neighbor, and felt his flesh creep
Title:  with uncontrollable horror when he found himself in actual contact with
Title:  Magua.
Title:  
Title:  The sudden return of this artful and dreaded chief caused a delay in the
Title:  departure of the Huron. Several pipes, that had been extinguished, were
Title:  lighted again; while the newcomer, without speaking a word, drew his
Title:  tomahawk from his girdle, and filling the bowl on its head began to inhale
Title:  the vapors of the weed through the hollow handle, with as much indifference
Title:  as if he had not been absent two weary days on a long and toilsome hunt. Ten
Title:  minutes, which appeared so many ages to Duncan, might have passed in this
Title:  manner; and the warriors were fairly enveloped in a cloud of white smoke
Title:  before any of them spoke.
Title:  
Title:  Welcome! one at length uttered; has my friend found the moose?
Title:  
Title:  The young men stagger under their burdens, returned Magua. Let
Title:  Reed-that-bends go on the hunting path; he will meet them.
Title:  
Title:  A deep and awful silence succeeded the utterance of the forbidden name. Each
Title:  pipe dropped from the lips of its owner as though all had inhaled an
Title:  impurity at the same instant. The smoke wreathed above their heads in little
Title:  eddies, and curling in a spiral form it ascended swiftly through the opening
Title:  in the roof of the lodge, leaving the place beneath clear of its fumes, and
Title:  each dark visage distinctly visible. The looks of most of the warriors were
Title:  riveted on the earth; though a few of the younger and less gifted of the
Title:  party suffered their wild and glaring eyeballs to roll in the direction of a
Title:  white-headed savage, who sat between two of the most venerated chiefs of the
Title:  tribe. There was nothing in the air or attire of this Indian that would seem
Title:  to entitle him to such a distinction. The former was rather depressed, than
Title:  remarkable for the bearing of the natives; and the latter was such as was
Title:  commonly worn by the ordinary men of the nation. Like most around him for
Title:  more than a minute his look, too, was on the ground; but, trusting his eyes
Title:  at length to steal a glance aside, he perceived that he was becoming an
Title:  object of general attention. Then he arose and lifted his voice in the
Title:  general silence.
Title:  
Title:  It was a lie, he said; I had no son. He who was called by that name is
Title:  forgotten; his blood was pale, and it came not from the veins of a Huron;
Title:  the wicked Chippewas cheated my squaw. The Great Spirit has said, that the
Title:  family of Wiss-entush should end; he is happy who knows that the evil of his
Title:  race dies with himself. I have done.
Title:  
Title:  The speaker, who was the father of the recreant young Indian, looked round
Title:  and about him, as if seeking commendation of his stoicism in the eyes of the
Title:  auditors. But the stern customs of his people had made too severe an
Title:  exaction of the feeble old man. The expression of his eye contradicted his
Title:  figurative and boastful language, while every muscle in his wrinkled visage
Title:  was working with anguish. Standing a single minute to enjoy his bitter
Title:  triumph, he turned away, as if sickening at the gaze of men, and, veiling
Title:  his face in his blanket, he walked from the lodge with the noiseless step of
Title:  an Indian seeking, in the privacy of his own abode, the sympathy of one like
Title:  himself, aged, forlorn and childless.
Title:  
Title:  The Indians, who believe in the hereditary transmission of virtues and
Title:  defects in character, suffered him to depart in silence. Then, with an
Title:  elevation of breeding that many in a more cultivated state of society might
Title:  profitably emulate, one of the chiefs drew the attention of the young men
Title:  from the weakness they had just witnessed, by saying, in a cheerful voice,
Title:  addressing himself in courtesy to Magua, as the newest comer:
Title:  
Title:  The Delawares have been like bears after the honey pots, prowling around my
Title:  village. But who has ever found a Huron asleep?
Title:  
Title:  The darkness of the impending cloud which precedes a burst of thunder was
Title:  not blacker than the brow of Magua as he exclaimed:
Title:  
Title:  The Delawares of the Lakes!
Title:  
Title:  Not so. They who wear the petticoats of squaws, on their own river. One of
Title:  them has been passing the tribe.
Title:  
Title:  Did my young men take his scalp?
Title:  
Title:  His legs were good, though his arm is better for the hoe than the tomahawk,
Title:  returned the other, pointing to the immovable form of Uncas.
Title:  
Title:  Instead of manifesting any womanish curiosity to feast his eyes with the
Title:  sight of a captive from a people he was known to have so much reason to
Title:  hate, Magua continued to smoke, with the meditative air that he usually
Title:  maintained, when there was no immediate call on his cunning or his
Title:  eloquence. Although secretly amazed at the facts communicated by the speech
Title:  of the aged father, he permitted himself to ask no questions, reserving his
Title:  inquiries for a more suitable moment. It was only after a sufficient
Title:  interval that he shook the ashes from his pipe, replaced the tomahawk,
Title:  tightened his girdle, and arose, casting for the first time a glance in the
Title:  direction of the prisoner, who stood a little behind him. The wary, though
Title:  seemingly abstracted Uncas, caught a glimpse of the movement, and turning
Title:  suddenly to the light, their looks met. Near a minute these two bold and
Title:  untamed spirits stood regarding one another steadily in the eye, neither
Title:  quailing in the least before the fierce gaze he encountered. The form of
Title:  Uncas dilated, and his nostrils opened like those of a tiger at bay; but so
Title:  rigid and unyielding was his posture, that he might easily have been
Title:  converted by the imagination into an exquisite and faultless representation
Title:  of the warlike diety of his tribe. The lineaments of the quivering features
Title:  of Magua proved more ductile; his countenance gradually lost its character
Title:  of defiance in an expression of ferocious joy, and heaving a breath from the
Title:  very bottom of his chest, he pronounced aloud the formidable name of:
Title:  
Title:  Le Cerf Agile!
Title:  
Title:  Each warrior sprang upon his feet at the utterance of the well-known
Title:  appellation, and there was a short period during which the stoical constancy
Title:  of the natives was completely conquered by surprise. The hated and yet
Title:  respected name was repeated as by one voice, carrying the sound even beyond
Title:  the limits of the lodge. The women and children, who lingered around the
Title:  entrance, took up the words in an echo, which was succeeded by another
Title:  shrill and plaintive howl. The latter was not yet ended, when the sensation
Title:  among the men had entirely abated. Each one in presence seated himself, as
Title:  though ashamed of his precipitation; but it was many minutes before their
Title:  meaning eyes ceased to roll toward their captive, in curious examination of
Title:  a warrior who had so often proved his prowess on the best and proudest of
Title:  their nation. Uncas enjoyed his victory, but was content with merely
Title:  exhibiting his triumph by a quiet smile - an emblem of scorn which belongs
Title:  to all time and every nation.
Title:  
Title:  Magua caught the expression, and raising his arm, he shook it at the
Title:  captive, the light silver ornaments attached to his bracelet rattling with
Title:  the trembling agitation of the limb, as, in a tone of vengeance, he
Title:  exclaimed, in English:
Title:  
Title:  Mohican, you die!
Title:  
Title:  The healing waters will never bring the dead Hurons to life, returned Uncas,
Title:  in the music of the Delawares; the tumbling river washes their bones; their
Title:  men are squaws: their women owls. Go! call together the Huron dogs, that
Title:  they may look upon a warrior, My nostrils are offended; they scent the blood
Title:  of a coward.
Title:  
Title:  The latter allusion struck deep, and the injury rankled. Many of the Hurons
Title:  understood the strange tongue in which the captive spoke, among which number
Title:  was Magua. This cunning savage beheld, and instantly profited by his
Title:  advantage. Dropping the light robe of skin from his shoulder, he stretched
Title:  forth his arm, and commenced a burst of his dangerous and artful eloquence.
Title:  However much his influence among his people had been impaired by his
Title:  occasional and besetting weakness, as well as by his desertion of the tribe,
Title:  his courage and his fame as an orator were undeniable. He never spoke
Title:  without auditors, and rarely without making converts to his opinions. On the
Title:  present occasion, his native powers were stimulated by the thirst of
Title:  revenge.
Title:  
Title:  He again recounted the events of the attack on the island at Glenn's, the
Title:  death of his associates and the escape of their most formidable enemies.
Title:  Then he described the nature and position of the mount whither he had led
Title:  such captives as had fallen into their hands. Of his own bloody intentions
Title:  toward the maidens, and of his baffled malice he made no mention, but passed
Title:  rapidly on to the surprise of the party by La Longue Carabine, and its fatal
Title:  termination. Here he paused, and looked about him, in affected veneration
Title:  for the departed, but, in truth, to note the effect of his opening
Title:  narrative. As usual, every eye was riveted on his face. Each dusky figure
Title:  seemed a breathing statue, so motionless was the posture, so intense the
Title:  attention of the individual.
Title:  
Title:  Then Magua dropped his voice which had hitherto been clear, strong and
Title:  elevated, and touched upon the merits of the dead. No quality that was
Title:  likely to command the sympathy of an Indian escaped his notice. One had
Title:  never been known to follow the chase in vain; another had been indefatigable
Title:  on the trail of their enemies. This was brave, that generous. In short, he
Title:  so managed his allusions, that in a nation which was composed of so few
Title:  families, he contrived to strike every chord that might find, in its turn,
Title:  some breast in which to vibrate.
Title:  
Title:  Are the bones of my young men, he concluded, in the burial-place of the
Title:  Hurons? Yu know they are not. Their spirits are gone toward the setting sun,
Title:  and are already crossing the great waters, to the happy hunting-grounds. But
Title:  they departed without food, without guns or knives, without moccasins, naked
Title:  and poor as they were born. Shall this be? Are their souls to enter the land
Title:  of the just like hungry Iroquois or unmanly Delawares, or shall they meet
Title:  their friends with arms in their hands and robes on their backs? What will
Title:  our fathers think the tribes of the Wyandots have become? They will look on
Title:  their children with a dark eye, and say, Go! a Chippewa has come hither with
Title:  the name of a Huron. Brothers, we must not forget the dead; a red-skin never
Title:  ceases to remember. We will load the back of this Mohican until he staggers
Title:  under our bounty, and dispatch him after my young men. They call to us for
Title:  aid, though our ears are not open; they say, Forget us not. When they see
Title:  the spirit of this Mohican toiling after them with his burden, they will
Title:  know we are of that mind.Then will they go on happy; and our children will
Title:  say, So did our fathers to their friends, so must we do to them What is a
Title:  Yengee? we have slain many, but the earth is still pale. A stain on the name
Title:  of Huron can only be hid by blood that comes from the veins of an Indian.
Title:  Let this Delaware die.
Title:  
Title:  The effect of such an harangue, delivered in the nervous language and with
Title:  the emphatic manner of a Huron orator, could scarcely be mistaken. Magua had
Title:  so artfully blended the natural sympathies with the religious superstition
Title:  of his auditors, that their minds, already prepared by custom to sacrifice a
Title:  victim to the manes of their countrymen, lost every vestige of humanity in a
Title:  wish for revenge. One warrior in particular, a man of wild and ferocious
Title:  mien, had been conspicuous for the attention he had given to the words of
Title:  the speaker. His countenance had changed with each passing emotion, until it
Title:  settled into a look of deadly malice. As Magua ended he arose and, uttering
Title:  the yell of a demon, his polished little axe was seen glancing in the
Title:  torchlight as he whirled it above his head. The motion and the cry were too
Title:  sudden for words to interrupt his bloody intention. It appeared as if a
Title:  bright gleam shot from his hand, which was crossed at the same moment by a
Title:  dark and powerful line. The former was the tomahawk in its passage; the
Title:  latter the arm that Magua darted forward to divert its aim. The quick and
Title:  ready motion of the chief was not entirely too late. The keen weapon cut the
Title:  war plume from the scalping tuft of Uncas, and passed through the frail wall
Title:  of the lodge as though it were hurled from some formidable engine.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan had seen the threatening action, and sprang upon his feet, with a
Title:  heart which, while it leaped into his throat, swelled with the most generous
Title:  resolution in behalf of his friend. A glance told him that the blow had
Title:  failed, and terror changed to admiration. Uncas stood still, looking his
Title:  enemy in the eye with features that seemed superior to emotion. Marble could
Title:  not be colder, calmer, or steadier than the countenance he put upon this
Title:  sudden and vindictive attack. Then, as if pitying a want of skill which had
Title:  proved so fortunate to himself, he smiled, and muttered a few words of
Title:  contempt in his own tongue.
Title:  
Title:  No! said Magua, after satisfying himself of the safety of the captive; the
Title:  sun must shine on his shame; the squaws must see his flesh tremble, or our
Title:  revenge will be like the play of boys. Go! take him where there is silence;
Title:  let us see if a Delaware can sleep at night, and in the morning die.
Title:  
Title:  The young men whose duty it was to guard the prisoner instantly passed their
Title:  ligaments of bark across his arms, and led him from the lodge, amid a
Title:  profound and ominous silence. It was only as the figure of Uncas stood in
Title:  the opening of the door that his firm step hesitated. There he turned, and,
Title:  in the sweeping and haughty glance that he threw around the circle of his
Title:  enemies, Duncan caught a look which he was glad to construe into an
Title:  expression that he was not entirely deserted by hope.
Title:  
Title:  Magua was content with his success, or too much occupied with his secret
Title:  purposes to push his inquiries any further. Shaking his mantle, and folding
Title:  it on his bosom, he also quitted the place, without pursuing a subject which
Title:  might have proved so fatal to the individual at his elbow. Nothwithstanding
Title:  his rising resentment, his natural firmness, and his anxiety on behalf of
Title:  Uncas, Heyward felt sensibly relieved by the absence of so dangerous and so
Title:  subtle a foe. The excitement produced by the speech gradually subsided. The
Title:  warriors resumed their seats and clouds of smoke once more filled the lodge.
Title:  For near half an hour, not a syllable was uttered, or scarcely a look cast
Title:  aside; a grave and meditative silence being the ordinary succession to every
Title:  scene of violence and commotion among these beings, who were alike so
Title:  impetuous and yet so self-restrained.
Title:  
Title:  When the chief, who had solicited the aid of Duncan, finished his pipe, he
Title:  made a final and successful movement toward departing. A motion of a finger
Title:  was the intimation he gave the supposed physician to follow; and passing
Title:  through the clouds of smoke, Duncad was glad, on more accounts than one, to
Title:  be able at last to breathe the pure air of a cool and refreshing summer
Title:  evening.
Title:  
Title:  Instead of pursuing his way among those lodges where Heyward had already
Title:  made his unsuccessful search, his companion turned aside, and proceeded
Title:  directly toward the base of an adjacent mountain, which overhung the
Title:  temporary village. A thicket of brush skirted its foot, and it became
Title:  necessary to proceed through a crooked and narrow path. The boys had resumed
Title:  their sports in the clearing, and were enacting a mimic chase to the post
Title:  among themselves. In order to render their games as like the reality as
Title:  possible, one of the boldest of their number had conveyed a few brands into
Title:  some piles of tree-tops that had hitherto escaped the burning. The blaze of
Title:  one of these fires lighted the way of the chief and Duncan, and gave a
Title:  character of additional wildness to the rude scenery. At a little distance
Title:  from a bald rock, and directly in its front, they entered a grassy opening,
Title:  which they prepared to cross. Just then fresh fuel was added to the fire,
Title:  and a powerful light penetrated even to that distant spot. It fell upon the
Title:  white surface of the mountain, and was reflected downward upon a dark and
Title:  mysterious-looking being that arose, unexpectedly, in their path. The Indian
Title:  paused, as if doubtful whether to proceed, and permitted his companion to
Title:  approach his side. A large black ball, which at first seemed stationary, now
Title:  began to move in a manner that to the latter was inexplicable. Again the
Title:  fire brightened and its glare fell more distinctly on the object. Then even
Title:  Duncan knew it, by its restless and sidling attitudes, which kept the upper
Title:  part of its form in constant motion, while the animal itself appeared
Title:  seated, to be a bear. Though it growled loudly and fiercely, and there were
Title:  instants when its glistening eyeballs might be seen, it gave no other
Title:  indications of hostility. The Huron, at least, seemed assured that the
Title:  intentions of this singular intruder were peaceable, for after giving it an
Title:  attentive examination, he quietly pursued his course.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, who knew that the animal was often domesticated among the Indians,
Title:  followed the example of his companion, believing that some favorite of the
Title:  tribe had found its way into the thicket, in search of food. They passed it
Title:  unmolested. Though obliged to come nearly in contact with the monster, the
Title:  Huron, who had at first so warily determined the character of his strange
Title:  visitor, was now content with proceeding without wasting a moment in further
Title:  examination; but Heyward was unable to prevent his eyes from looking
Title:  backward, in salutary watchfulness against attacks in the rear. His
Title:  uneasiness was in no degree diminished when he perceived the beast rolling
Title:  along their path, and following their footsteps. He would have spoken, but
Title:  the Indian at that moment shoved aside a door of bark, and entered a cavern
Title:  in the bosom of the mountain.
Title:  
Title:  Profiting by so easy a method of retreat, Duncan stepped after him, and was
Title:  gladly closing the slight cover to the opening, when he felt it drawn from
Title:  his hand by the beast, whose shaggy form immediately darkened the passage.
Title:  They were now in a straight and long gallery, in a chasm of the rocks, where
Title:  retreat without encountering the animal was impossible. Making the best of
Title:  the circumstances, the young man pressed forward, keeping as close as
Title:  possible to his conductor. The bear growled frequently at his heels, and
Title:  once or twice its enormous paws were laid on his person, as if disposed to
Title:  prevent his further passage into the den.
Title:  
Title:  How long the nerves of Heyward would have sustained him in this
Title:  extraordinary situation, it might be difficult to decide, for, happily, he
Title:  soon found relief. A glimmer of light had constantly been in their front,
Title:  and they now arrived at the place whence it proceeded.
Title:  
Title:  A large cavity in the rock had been rudely fitted to answer the purposes of
Title:  many apartments. The subdivisions were simple but ingenious, being composed
Title:  of stone, sticks, and bark, intermingled. Openings above admitted the light
Title:  by day, and at night fires and torches supplied the place of the sun. Hither
Title:  the Hurons had brought most of their valuables, especially those which more
Title:  particularly pertained to the nation; and hither, as it now appeared, the
Title:  sick woman, who was believed to be the victim of supernatural power, had
Title:  been transported also, under an impression that her tormentor would find
Title:  more difficulty in making his assaults through walls of stone than through
Title:  the leafy coverings of the lodges. The apartment into which Duncan and his
Title:  guide first entered, had been exclusively devoted to her accommodation. The
Title:  latter approached her bedside, which was surrounded by females, in the
Title:  center of whom Heyward was surprised to find his missing friend David.
Title:  
Title:  A single look was sufficient to apprise the pretended leech that the invalid
Title:  was far beyond his powers of healing. She lay in a sort of paralysis,
Title:  indifferent to the objects which crowded before her sight, and happily
Title:  unconscious of suffering. Heyward was far from regretting that his mummeries
Title:  were to be performed on one who was much too ill to take an interest in
Title:  their failure or success. The slight qualm of conscience which had been
Title:  excited by the intended deception was instantly appeased, and he began to
Title:  collect his thoughts, in order to enact his part with suitable spirit, when
Title:  he found he was about to be anticipated in his skill by an attempt to prove
Title:  the power of music.
Title:  
Title:  Gamut, who had stood prepared to pour forth his spirit in song when the
Title:  visitors entered, after delaying a moment, drew a strain from his pipe, and
Title:  commenced a hymn that might have worked a miracle, had faith in is efficacy
Title:  been of much avail. He was allowed to proceed to the close, the Indians
Title:  respecting his imaginary infirmity, and Duncan too glad of the delay to
Title:  hazard the slightest interruption. As the dying cadence of his strains was
Title:  falling on the ears of the latter, he started aside at hearing them repeated
Title:  behind him, in a voice half human and half sepulchral. Looking around, he
Title:  beheld the shaggy monster seated on end in a shadow of the cavern, where,
Title:  while his restless body swung in the uneasy manner of the animal, it
Title:  repeated, in a sort of low growl, sounds, if not words, which bore some
Title:  slight resemblance to the melody of the singer.
Title:  
Title:  The effect of so strange an echo on David may better be imagined than
Title:  described. His eyes opened as if he doubted their truth; and his voice
Title:  became instantly mute in excess of wonder. A deep-laid scheme, of
Title:  communicating some important intelligence to Heyward, was driven from his
Title:  recollection by an emotion which very nearly resembled fear, but which he
Title:  was fain to believe was admiration. Under its influence, he exclaimed aloud:
Title:  She expects you, and is at hand; and precipitately left the cavern.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 25
Title:  
Title:       Snug: Have you the lion's part written?
Title:       Pray you, if it be, give it to me, for I am slow of study.
Title:  
Title:       Quince: You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
Title:  
Title:                                                 MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
Title:  
Title:  There was a strange blending of the ridiculous with that which was solemn in
Title:  this scene. The beast sill continued its rolling, and apparently untiring
Title:  movements, though its ludicrous attempt to imitate the melody of David
Title:  ceased the instant the latter abandoned the field. The words of Gamut were,
Title:  as has been seen, in his native tongue; and to Duncan they seem pregnant
Title:  with some hidden meaning, though nothing present assisted him in discovering
Title:  the object of their allusion. A speedy end was, however, put to every
Title:  conjecture on the subject, by the manner of the chief, who advanced to the
Title:  bedside of the invalid, and beckoned away the whole group of female
Title:  attendants that had clustered there to witness the skill of the stranger. He
Title:  was implicitly, though reluctantly, obeyed; and when the low echo which rang
Title:  along the hollow, natural gallery, from the distant closing door, had
Title:  ceased, pointing toward his insensible daughter, he said:
Title:  
Title:  Now let my brother show his power.
Title:  
Title:  Thus unequivocally called on to exercise the functions of his assumed
Title:  character, Heyward was apprehensive that the smallest delay might prove
Title:  dangerous. Endeavoring, then, to collect his ideas, he prepared to perform
Title:  that species of incantation, and those uncouth rites, under which the Indian
Title:  conjurers are accustomed to conceal their ingnorance and impotency. It is
Title:  more than probable that, in the disordered state of his thoughts, he would
Title:  soon have fallen into some suspicious, if not fatal, error had not his
Title:  incipient attempts been interrupted by a fierce growl from the quadruped.
Title:  Three several times did he renew his efforts to proceed, and as often was he
Title:  met by the same unaccountable opposition, each interruption seeming more
Title:  savage and threatening than the preceding.
Title:  
Title:  The cunning ones are jealous, said the Huron; I go Brother, the woman is the
Title:  wife of one of my bravest young men; deal justly by her. Peace! he added,
Title:  beckoning to the discontented beast to be quiet; I go.
Title:  
Title:  The chief was as good as his word, and Duncan now found himself alone in
Title:  that wild and desolate abode with the helpless invalid and the fierce and
Title:  dangerous brute. The latter listened to the movements of the Indian with
Title:  that air of sagacity that a bear is known to possess, until another echo
Title:  announced that he had also left the cavern, when it turned and came waddling
Title:  up to Duncan before whom it seated itself in its natural attitude, erect
Title:  like a man. The youth looked anxiously about him for some weapon, with which
Title:  he might make a resistance against the attack he now seriously expected.
Title:  
Title:  It seemed, however, as if the humor of the animal had suddenly changed.
Title:  Instead of continuing its discontented growls, or manifesting any further
Title:  signs of anger, the whole of its shaggy body shook violently, as if agitated
Title:  by some strange internal convulsion. The huge and unwieldy talons pawed
Title:  stupidly about the grinning muzzle, and while Heyward kept his eyes riveted
Title:  on its movements with jealous watchfulness, the grim head fell on one side
Title:  and in its place appeared the honest sturdy countenance of the scout, who
Title:  was indulging from the bottom of his soul in his own peculiar expression of
Title:  merriment.
Title:  
Title:  Hist! said the wary woodsman, interrupting Heyward's exclamation of
Title:  surprise; the varlets are about the place, and any sounds that are not
Title:  natural to witchcraft would bring them back upon us in a body.
Title:  
Title:  Tell me the meaning of this masquerade; and why you have attempted so
Title:  desperate an adventure?
Title:  
Title:  Ah, reason and calculation are often outdone by accident, returned the
Title:  scout. But, as a story should always commence at the beginning, I will tell
Title:  you the whole in order. After we parted I placed the commandant and the
Title:  Sagamore in an old beaver lodge, where they are safer from the Hurons than
Title:  they would be in the garrison of Edward for your high north-west Indians,
Title:  not having as yet got the traders among them, continued to venerate the
Title:  beaver. After which Uncas and I pushed for the other encampment as was
Title:  agreed. Have you seen the lad?
Title:  
Title:  To my great grief! He is captive, and condemned to die at the rising of the
Title:  sun.
Title:  
Title:  I had misgivings that such would be his fate, resumed the scout, in a less
Title:  confident and joyous tone. But soon regaining his naturally firm voice, he
Title:  continued: His bad fortune is the true reason of my being here, for it would
Title:  never do to abandon such a boy to the Hurons. A rare time the knaves would
Title:  have of it, could they tie The Bounding Elk and The Long Carabine, as they
Title:  call me, to the same stake! Though why they have given me such a name I
Title:  never knew, there being as little likeness between the gifts of killdeer and
Title:  the performance of one of your real Canada carabynes, as there is between
Title:  the natur' of a pipe-stone and a flint.
Title:  
Title:  Keep to your tale, said the impatient Heyward; we know not at what moment
Title:  the Hurons may return.
Title:  
Title:  No fear of them. A conjurer must have his time, like a straggling priest in
Title:  the settlements. We are as safe from interruption as a missionary would be
Title:  at the beginining of a two hours' discourse. Well, Uncas and I fell in with
Title:  a return party of the varlets; the lad was much too forward for a scout;
Title:  nay, for that matter, being of hot blood, he was not so much to blame; and,
Title:  after all, one of the Hurons proved a coward, and in fleeing led him into an
Title:  ambushment.
Title:  
Title:  And dearly has he paid for the weakness.
Title:  
Title:  The scout significantly passed his hand across his own throat, and nodded,
Title:  as if he said, I comprehend your meaning. After which he continued, in a
Title:  more audible though scarcely more intelligible language:
Title:  
Title:  After the loss of the boy I turned upon the Hurons, as you may judge. There
Title:  have been scrimmages atween one or two of their outlyers and myself; but
Title:  that is neither here nor there. So, after I had shot the imps, I got in
Title:  pretty nigh to the lodges without further commotion. Then what should luck
Title:  do in my favor but lead me to the very spot where one of the most famous
Title:  conjurers of the tribe was dressing himself, as I well knew, for some great
Title:  battle with Satan - though why should I call that luck, which it now seems
Title:  was an especial ordering of Providence. So a judgmatical rap over the head
Title:  stiffened the lying imposter for a time, and leaving him a bit of walnut for
Title:  his supper, to prevent an uproar, and stringing him up atween two saplings,
Title:  I made free with his finery, and took the part of the bear on myself, in
Title:  order that the operations might proceed.
Title:  
Title:  And admirably did you enact the character; the animal itself might have been
Title:  shamed by the representation.
Title:  
Title:  Lord, major, returned the flattered woodsman, I should be but a poor scholar
Title:  for one who has studied so long in the wilderness, did I not know how to set
Title:  forth the movements of natur' of such a beast. Had it been now a catamount,
Title:  or even a full-size panther, I would have embellished a performance for you
Title:  worth regarding. But it is no such marvelous feat to exhibit the feats of so
Title:  dull a beast; though, for that matter, too, a bear may be overacted. Yes,
Title:  yes; it is not every imitator that knows natur' may be outdone easier than
Title:  she is equalled. But all our work is yet before us. Where is the gentle one?
Title:  
Title:  Heaven knows. I have examined every lodge in the village, without
Title:  discovering the slightest trace of her presence in the tribe.
Title:  
Title:  You heard what the singer said, as he left us: She is at hand, and expects
Title:  you?
Title:  
Title:  I have been compelled to believe he alluded to this unhappy woman.
Title:  
Title:  The simpleton was frightened, and blundered through his message; but he had
Title:  a deeper meaning. Here are walls enough to separate the hole settlement. A
Title:  bear ought to climb; therefore will I take a look above them. There may be
Title:  honey-pots hid in these rocks, and I am a beast, you know, that has a
Title:  hankering for the sweets.
Title:  
Title:  The scout looked behind him, laughing at his own conceit, while he clambered
Title:  up the partition, imitating, as he went, the clumsy motions of the beast he
Title:  represented; but the instant the summit was gained he made a gesture for
Title:  silence, and slid down with the utmost precipitation.
Title:  
Title:  She is here, he whispered, and by that door you will find her. I would have
Title:  spoken a word of comfort to the afflicted soul; but the sight of such a
Title:  monster might upset her reason. Though for that matter, major, you are none
Title:  of the most inviting yourself in your paint.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, who had already swung eagerly forward, drew instantly back on
Title:  hearing these discouraging words.
Title:  
Title:  Am I, then, so very revolting? he demanded, with an air of chagrin.
Title:  
Title:  You might not startle a wolf, or turn the Royal Americans from a discharge;
Title:  but I have seen the time when you had a better favored look; your streaked
Title:  countenances are not ill-judged of by the squaws, but young women of white
Title:  blood give the preference to their own color. See, he added, pointing to a
Title:  place where the water trickled from a rock, forming a little crystal spring,
Title:  before it found an issue through the adjacent crevices; you may easily get
Title:  rid of the Sagamore's daub, and when you come back I will try my hand at a
Title:  new embellishment. It's as common for a conjurer to alter his paint as for a
Title:  buck in the settlements to change his finery.
Title:  
Title:  The deliberate woodsman had little occasion to hunt for arguments to enforce
Title:  his advice. He was yet speaking when Duncan availed himself of the water. In
Title:  a moment every frightful or offensive mark was obliterated, and the youth
Title:  appeared again in the lineaments with which he had been gifted by nature.
Title:  Thus prepared for an interview with his mistress, he took a hasty leave of
Title:  his companion, and disappeared through the indicated passage. The scout
Title:  witnessed his departure with complacency, nodding his head after him, and
Title:  muttering his good wishes; after which he very coolly set about an
Title:  examination of the state of the larder, among the Hurons, the cavern, among
Title:  other purposes, being used as a receptacle for the fruits of their hunts.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan had no other guide than a distant glimmering light, which served,
Title:  however, the office of a polar star to the lover. By its aid he was enabled
Title:  to enter the haven of his hopes, which was merely another apartment of the
Title:  cavern, that had been solely appropriated to the safekeeping of so important
Title:  a prisoner as a daughter of the commandant of William Henry. It was
Title:  profusely strewed with the plunder of that unlucky fortress. In the midst of
Title:  this confusion he found her he sought, pale, anxious and terrified, but
Title:  lovely. David had prepared her for such a visit.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan! she exclaimed, in a voice that seemed to tremble at the sounds
Title:  created by itself.
Title:  
Title:  Alice! he answered, leaping carelessly among trunks, boxes, arms, and
Title:  furniture, until he stood at her side.
Title:  
Title:  I knew that you would never desert me, she said, looking up with a momentary
Title:  glow on her otherwise dejected countenance. But you are alone! Grateful as
Title:  it is to be thus remembered, I could wish to think you are not entirely
Title:  alone.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, observing that she trembled in a manner which betrayed her inability
Title:  to stand, gently induced her to be seated, while he recounted those leading
Title:  incidents which it has been our task to accord. Alice listened with
Title:  breathless interest; and though the young man touched lightly on the sorrows
Title:  of the stricken father; taking care, however, not to wound the self-love of
Title:  his auditor, the tears ran as freely down the cheeks of the daughter as
Title:  though she had never wept before. The soothing tenderness of Duncan,
Title:  however, soon quieted the first burst of her emotions, and she then heard
Title:  him to the close with undivided attention, if not with composure.
Title:  
Title:  And now, Alice, he added, you will see how much is still expected of you. By
Title:  the assistance of our experienced and invaluable friend, the scout, we may
Title:  find our way from this savage people, but you will have to exert your utmost
Title:  fortitude. Remember that you fly to the arms of your venerable parent, and
Title:  how much his happiness, as well as your own, depends on those exertions.
Title:  
Title:  Can I do otherwise for a father who has done so much for me?
Title:  
Title:  And for me, too, continued the youth, gently pressing the hand he held in
Title:  both his own.
Title:  
Title:  The look of innocence and surprise which he received in return convinced
Title:  Duncan of the necessity of being more explicit.
Title:  
Title:  This is neither the place nor the occasion to detain you with selfish
Title:  wishes, he added; but what heart loaded like mine would not wish to cast its
Title:  burden? They say misery is the closest of all ties; our common suffering in
Title:  your behalf left but little to be explained between your father and myself.
Title:  
Title:  And, dearest Cora, Duncan; surely Cora was not forgotten?
Title:  
Title:  Not forgotten! no; regretted, as woman was seldom mourned before. Your
Title:  venerable father knew no difference between his children; but I - Alice, you
Title:  will not be offended when I say, that to me her worth was in a degree
Title:  obscured - -
Title:  
Title:  Then you knew not the merit of my sister, said Alice, withdrawing her hand;
Title:  of you she ever speaks as of one who is her dearest friend.
Title:  
Title:  I would gladly believe her such, returned Duncan, hastily; I could wish her
Title:  to be even more; but with you, Alice, I have the permission of your father
Title:  to aspire to a still nearer and dearer tie.
Title:  
Title:  Alice trembled violently, and there was an instant during which she bent her
Title:  face aside, yielding to the emotions common to her sex; but they quickly
Title:  passed away, leaving her mistress of her deportment, if not of her
Title:  affections.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward, she said, looking him full in the face with a touching expression
Title:  of innocence and dependency, give me the sacred presence and the holy
Title:  sanction of that parent before you urge me further.
Title:  
Title:  Though more I should not, less I could not say, the youth was about to
Title:  answer, when he was interrupted by a light tap on his shoulder. Starting to
Title:  his feet, he turned, and, confronting the intruder, his looks fell on the
Title:  dark form and malignant visage of Magua. The deep guttural laugh of the
Title:  savage sounded, at such a moment, to Duncan, like the hellish taunt of a
Title:  demon. Had he pursued the sudden and fierce impulse of the instant, he would
Title:  have cast himself on the Huron, and committed their fortunes to the issue of
Title:  a deadly struggle. But, without arms of any description, ignorant of what
Title:  succor his subtle enemy could command, and charged with the safety of one
Title:  who was just then dearer than ever to his heart, he no sooner entertained
Title:  than he abandoned the desperate intention.
Title:  
Title:  What is your purpose? said Alice, meekly folding her arms on her bosom, and
Title:  struggling to conceal an agony of apprehension in behalf of Heyward, in the
Title:  usual cold and distant manner with which she received the visits of her
Title:  captor.
Title:  
Title:  The exulting Indian had resumed his austere countenance, though he drew
Title:  warily back before the menancing glance of the young man's fiery eye. He
Title:  regarded both his captives for a moment with a steady look, and then,
Title:  stepping aside, he dropped a log of wood across a door different from that
Title:  by which Duncan had entered. The latter now comprehended the manner of his
Title:  surprise, and, believing himself irretrievably lost, he drew Alice to his
Title:  bosom, and stood prepared to meet a fate which he hardly regretted, since it
Title:  was to be suffered in such company. But Magua meditated no immediate
Title:  violence. His first measures were very evidently taken to secure his new
Title:  captive; nor did he even bestow a second glance at the motionless forms in
Title:  the center of the cavern, until he had completely cut off every hope of
Title:  retreat through the private outlet he had himself used. He was watched in
Title:  all his movements by Heyward, who, however, remained firm, still folding the
Title:  fragile form of Alice to his heart, at once too proud and too hopeless to
Title:  ask favor of an enemy so often foiled. When Magua had effected his object he
Title:  approached his prisoners, and said in English:
Title:  
Title:  The pale faces trap the cunning beavers; but the red-skins know how to take
Title:  the Yengeese.
Title:  
Title:  Huron, do your worst! exclaimed the excited Heyward, forgetful that a double
Title:  stake was involved in his life; you and your vengeance are alike despised.
Title:  
Title:  Will the white man speak these words at the stake? asked Magua; manifesting,
Title:  at the same time, how little faith he had in the other's resolution by the
Title:  sneer that accompanied his words.
Title:  
Title:  Here; singly to your face, or in the presence of your nation.
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard Subtil is a great chief! returned the Indian; he will go and bring
Title:  his young men, to see how bravely a pale face can laugh at tortures.
Title:  
Title:  He turned away while speaking, and was about to leave the place through the
Title:  avenue by which Duncan had approached, when a growl caught his ear, and
Title:  caused him to hesitate. The figure of the bear appeared in the door, where
Title:  it sat, rolling from side to side in its customary restlessness. Magua, like
Title:  the father of the sick woman, eyed it keenly for a moment, as if to
Title:  ascertain its character. He was far above the more vulgar superstitions of
Title:  his tribe, and so soon as he recognized the well-known attire of the
Title:  conjurer, he prepared to pass it in cool contempt. But a louder and more
Title:  threatening growl caused him again to pause. Then he seemed as if suddenly
Title:  resolved to trifle no longer, and moved resolutely forward.
Title:  
Title:  The mimic animal, which had advanced a little, retired slowly in his front,
Title:  until it arrived again at the pass, when, rearing on his hinder legs, it
Title:  beat the air with its paws, in the manner practised by its brutal prototype.
Title:  
Title:  Fool! exclaimed the chief, in Huron, go play with the children and squaws;
Title:  leave men to their wisdom.
Title:  
Title:  He once more endeavored to pass the supposed empiric, scorning even the
Title:  parade of threatening to use the knife, or tomahawk, that was pendent from
Title:  his belt. Suddenly the beast extended its arms, or rather legs, and inclosed
Title:  him in a grasp that might have vied with the far-famed power of the bear's
Title:  hug itself. Heyward had watched the whole procedure, on the part of Hawkeye,
Title:  with breathless interest. At first he relinquished his hold of Alice; then
Title:  he caught up a thong of buckskin, which had been used around some bundle,
Title:  and when he beheld his enemy with his two arms pinned to his side by the
Title:  iron muscles of the scout, he rushed upon him, and effectually secured them
Title:  there. Arms, legs, and feet were encircled in twenty folds of the thong, in
Title:  less time than we have taken to record the circumstance. When the formidable
Title:  Huron was completely pinioned, the scout released his hold, and Duncan laid
Title:  his enemy on his back, utterly helpless.
Title:  
Title:  Throughout the whole of this sudden and extraordinary operation, Magua,
Title:  though he had struggled violently, until assured he was in the hands of one
Title:  whose nerves were far better strung than his own, had not uttered the
Title:  slightest exclamation. But when Hawkeye, by way of making a summary
Title:  explanation of his conduct, removed the shaggy jaws of the beast, and
Title:  exposed his own rugged and earnest countenance to the gaze of the Huron, the
Title:  philosophy of the latter was so far mastered as to permit him to utter the
Title:  never failing:
Title:  
Title:  Hugh!
Title:  
Title:  Ay, you've found your tongue, said his undisturbed conqueror; now, in order
Title:  that you shall not use it to our ruin, I must make free to stop your mouth.
Title:  
Title:  As there was no time to be lost, the scout immediately set about effecting
Title:  so necessary a precaution; and when he had gagged the Indian, his enemy
Title:  might safely have been considered as hors de combat.
Title:  
Title:  By what place did the imp enter? asked the industrious scout, when his work
Title:  was ended. Not a soul has passed my way since you left me.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan pointed out the door by which Magua had come, and which now presented
Title:  too many obstacles to a quick retreat.
Title:  
Title:  Bring on the gentle one, then, continued his friend; we must make a push for
Title:  the woods by the other outlet.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis impossible! said Duncan; fear has overcome her, and she is helpless.
Title:  Alice! my sweet, my own Alice, arouse yourself; now is the moment to fly.
Title:  'Tis in vain! she hears, but is unable to follow. Go, noble and worthy
Title:  friend; save yourself, and leave me to my fate.
Title:  
Title:  Every trail has its end, and every calamity brings its lesson! returned the
Title:  scout. There, wrap her in them Indian cloths. Conceal all of her little
Title:  form. Nay, that foot has no fellow in the wilderness; it will betray her.
Title:  All, every part. Now take her in your arms, and follow. Leave the rest to
Title:  me.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, as may be gathered from the words of his companion, was eagerly
Title:  obeying; and, as the other finished speaking, he took the light person of
Title:  Alice in his arms, and followed in the footsteps of the scout. They found
Title:  the sick woman as they had left her, still alone, and passed swiftly on, by
Title:  the natural gallery, to the place of entrance. As they approached the little
Title:  door of bark, a murmur of voices without announced that the friends and
Title:  relatives of the invalid were gathered about the place, patiently awaiting a
Title:  summons to re-enter.
Title:  
Title:  If I open my lips to speak, Hawkeye whispered, my English, which is the
Title:  genuine tongue of a white-skin, will tell the varlets that an enemy is among
Title:  them. You must give 'em your jargon, major; and say that we have shut the
Title:  evil spirit in the cave, and are taking the woman to the woods in order to
Title:  find strengthening roots. Practise all your cunning, for it is a lawful
Title:  undertaking.
Title:  
Title:  The door opened a little, as if one without was listening to the proceedings
Title:  within, and compelled the scout to cease his directions. A fierce growl
Title:  repelled the eavesdropper, and then the scout boldly threw open the covering
Title:  of bark, and left the place, enacting the character of a bear as he
Title:  proceeded. Duncan kept close at his heels, and soon found himself in the
Title:  center of a cluster of twenty anxious relatives and friends.
Title:  
Title:  The crowd fell back a little, and permitted the father, and one who appeared
Title:  to be the husband of the woman, to approach.
Title:  
Title:  Has my brother driven away the evil spirit? demanded the former. What has he
Title:  in his arms?
Title:  
Title:  Thy child, returned Duncan, gravely; the disease has gone out of her; it is
Title:  shut up in the rocks. I take the woman to a distance, where I will
Title:  strengthen her against any further attacks. She will be in the wigwam of the
Title:  young man when the sun comes again.
Title:  
Title:  When the father had translated the meaning of the stranger's words into the
Title:  Huron language, a suppressed murmur announced the satisfaction with which
Title:  this intelligence was received. The chief himself waved his hand for Duncan
Title:  to proceed, saying aloud, in a firm voice, and with a lofty manner:
Title:  
Title:  Go; I am a man, and I will enter the rock and fight the wicked one.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward had gladly obeyed, and was already past the little group, when these
Title:  startling words arrested him.
Title:  
Title:  Is my brother mad? he exclaimed; is he cruel? He wil meet the disease, and
Title:  it will enter him; or he will drive out the disease, and it will chase his
Title:  daughter into the woods. No; let my children wait without, and if the spirit
Title:  appears beat him down with clubs. He is cunning, and will bury himself in
Title:  the mountain, when he sees how many are ready to fight him.
Title:  
Title:  This singular warning had the desired effect. Instead of entering the
Title:  cavern, the father and husband drew their tomahawks, and posted themselves
Title:  in readiness to deal their vengeance on the imaginary tormentor of their
Title:  sick relative, while the women and children broke branches from the bushes,
Title:  or seized fragments of the rock, with a similar intention. At this favorable
Title:  moment the counterfeit conjurers disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye, at the same time that he had presumed so far on the nature of the
Title:  Indian superstitions, was not ignorant that they were rather tolerated than
Title:  relied on by the wisest of the chiefs. He well knew the value of time in the
Title:  present emergency. Whatever might be the extent of the self-delusion of his
Title:  enemies, and however it had tended to assist his schemes, the slightest
Title:  cause of suspicion, acting on the subtle nature of an Indian, would be
Title:  likely to prove fatal. Taking the path, therefore, that was most likely to
Title:  avoid observation, he rather skirted than entered the village. The warriors
Title:  were still to be seen in the distance, by the fading light of the fires,
Title:  stalking from lodge to lodge. But the children had abandoned their sports
Title:  for their beds of skins, and the quiet of night was already beginning to
Title:  prevail over the turbulence and excitement of so busy and important an
Title:  evening.
Title:  
Title:  Alice revived under the renovating influence of the open air, and, as her
Title:  physical rather than her mental powers had been the subject of weakness, she
Title:  stood in no need of any explanation of that which had occurred.
Title:  
Title:  Now let me make an effort to walk, she said, when they had entered the
Title:  forest, blushing, though unseen, that she had not been sooner able to quit
Title:  the arms of Duncan; I am indeed restored.
Title:  
Title:  Nay, Alice, you are yet too weak.
Title:  
Title:  The maiden struggled gently to release herself, and Heyward was compelled to
Title:  part with his precious burden. The representative of the bear had certainly
Title:  been an entire stranger to the delicious emotions of the lover while his
Title:  arms encircled his mistress; and he was, perhaps, a stranger also to the
Title:  nature of that feeling of ingenuous shame that oppressed the trembling
Title:  Alice. But when he found himself at a suitable distance from the lodges he
Title:  made a halt, and spoke on a subject of which he was thoroughly the master.
Title:  
Title:  This path will lead you to the brook, he said; follow its northern bank
Title:  until you come to a fall; mount the hill on your right, and you will see the
Title:  fires of the other people. There you must go and demand protection; if they
Title:  are true Delawares you will be safe. A distant flight with that gentle one,
Title:  just now, is impossible. The Hurons would follow up our trail, and master
Title:  our scalps before we had got a dozen miles. Go, and Providence be with you.
Title:  
Title:  And you! demanded Heyward, in surprise; surely we part not here?
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons hold the pride of the Delawares; the last of the high blood of
Title:  the Mohicans is in their power, returned the scout; I go to see what can be
Title:  done in his favor. Had they mastered your scalp, major, a knave should have
Title:  fallen for every hair it held, as I promised; but if the young Sagamore is
Title:  to be led to the stake, the Indians shall see also how a man without a cross
Title:  can die.
Title:  
Title:  Not in the least offended with the decided preference that the sturdy
Title:  woodsman gave to one who might, in some degree, be called the child of his
Title:  adoption, Duncan still continued to urge such reasons against so desperate
Title:  an effort as presented themselves. He was aided by Alice, who mingled her
Title:  entreaties with those of Heyward that he would abandon a resolution that
Title:  promised so much danger, with so little hope of success. Their eloquence and
Title:  ingenuity were expended in vain. The scout heard them attentively, but
Title:  impatiently, and finally closed the discussion, by answering, in a tone that
Title:  instantly silenced Alice, while it told Heyward how fruitless any further
Title:  remonstrances would be.
Title:  
Title:  I have heard, he said, that there is a feeling in youth which binds man to
Title:  woman closer than the father is tied to the son. It may be so. I have seldom
Title:  been where women of my color dwell; but such may be the gifts of nature in
Title:  the settlements. You have risked life, and all that is dear to you, to bring
Title:  off this gentle one, and I suppose that some such disposition is at the
Title:  bottom of it all. As for me, I taught the lad the real character of a rifle;
Title:  and well has he paid me for it. I have fou't at his side in many a bloody
Title:  scrimmage; and so long as I could hear the crack of his piece in one ear,
Title:  and that of the Sagamore in the other, I knew no enemy was on my back.
Title:  Winters and summer, nights and days, have we roved the wilderness in
Title:  company, eating of the same dish, one sleeping while the other watched; and
Title:  afore it shall be said that Uncas was taken to the torment, and I at hand -
Title:  There is but a single Ruler of us all, whatever may the color of the skin;
Title:  and Him I call to witness, that before the Mohican boy shall perish for the
Title:  want of a friend, good faith shall depart the 'arth, and killdeer become as
Title:  harmless as the tooting we'pon of the singer!
Title:  
Title:  Duncan released his hold on the arm of the scout, who turned, and steadily
Title:  retraced his steps toward the lodges. After pausing a moment to gaze at his
Title:  retiring form, the successful and yet sorrowful Heyward and Alice took their
Title:  way together toward the distant village of the Delawares.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 26
Title:  
Title:       Bottom: Let me play the lion too.
Title:  
Title:                                                 MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding the high resolution of Hawkeye he fully comprehended all the
Title:  difficulties and danger he was about to incur. In his return to the camp,
Title:  his acute and practised intellects were intently engaged in devising means
Title:  to counteract a watchfulness and suspicion on the part of his enemies, that
Title:  he knew were, in no degree, inferior to his own. Nothing but the color of
Title:  his skin had saved the lives of Magua and the conjurer, who would have been
Title:  the first victims sacrificed to his own security, had not the scout believed
Title:  such an act, however congenial it might be to the nature of an Indian,
Title:  utterly unworthy of one who boasted a descent from men that knew no cross of
Title:  blood. Accordingly, he trusted to the withes and ligaments with which he had
Title:  bound his captives, and pursued his way directly toward the center of the
Title:  lodges. As he approached the buildings, his steps become more deliberate,
Title:  and his vigilant eye suffered no sign, whether friendly or hostile, to
Title:  escape him. A neglected hut was a little in advance of the others, and
Title:  appeared as if it had been deserted when half completed - most probably on
Title:  account of failing in some of the more important requisites; such as wood or
Title:  water. A faint light glimmered through its cracks, however, and announced
Title:  that, notwithstanding its imperfect structure, it was not without a tenant.
Title:  Thither, then, the scout proceeded, like a prudent general, who was about to
Title:  feel the advanced positions of his enemy, before he hazarded the main
Title:  attack.
Title:  
Title:  Throwing himself into a suitable posture for the beast he represented,
Title:  Hawkeye crawled to a little opening, where he might command a view of the
Title:  interior. It proved to be the abiding place of David Gamut. Hither the
Title:  faithful singing-master had now brought himself, together with all his
Title:  sorrows, his apprehensions, and his meek dependence on the protection of
Title:  Providence. At the precise moment when his ungainly person came under the
Title:  observation of the scout, in the manner just mentioned, the woodsman
Title:  himself, though in his assumed character, was the subject of the solitary
Title:  being's profounded reflections.
Title:  
Title:  However implicit the faith of David was in the performance of ancient
Title:  miracles, he eschewed the belief of any direct supernatural agency in the
Title:  management of modern morality. In other words, while he had implicit faith
Title:  in the ability of Balaam's ass to speak, he was somewhat skeptical on the
Title:  subject of a bear's singing; and yet he had been assured of the latter, on
Title:  the testimony of his own exquisite organs. There was something in his air
Title:  and manner that betrayed to the scout the utter confusion of the state of
Title:  his mind. He was seated on a pile of brush, a few twigs from which
Title:  occasionally fed his low fire, with his head leaning on his arm, in a
Title:  posture of melancholy musing. The costume of the votary of music had
Title:  undergone no other alteration from that so lately described, except that he
Title:  had covered his bald head with the triangular beaver, which had not proved
Title:  sufficiently alluring to excite the cupidity of any of his captors.
Title:  
Title:  The ingeniousHawkeye, who recalled the hasty manner in which the other had
Title:  abandoned his post at the bedside of the sick woman, was not without his
Title:  suspicions concerning the subject of so much solemn deliberation. First
Title:  making the circuit of the hut, and ascertaining that it stood quite alone,
Title:  and that the character of its inmate was likely to protect it from visitors,
Title:  he ventured through its low door, into the very presence of Gamut. The
Title:  position of the latter brought the fire between them; and when Hawkeye had
Title:  seated himself on end, near a minute elapsed, during which the two remained
Title:  regarding each other without speaking. The suddenness and the nature of the
Title:  surprise had nearly proved too much for - we will not say the philosophy -
Title:  but for the pitch and resolution of David. He fumbled for his pitch-pipe,
Title:  and arose with a confused intention of attempting a musical exorcism.
Title:  
Title:  Dark and mysterious monster! he exclaimed, while with trembling hands he
Title:  disposed of his auxiliary eyes, and sought his never-failing resource in
Title:  trouble, the gifted version of the psalms; I know not your nature nor
Title:  intents; but if aught you meditate against the person and rights of one of
Title:  the humblest servants of the temple, listen to the inspired language of the
Title:  youth of Israel, and repent.
Title:  
Title:  The bear shook his shaggy sides, and then a well-known voice replied:
Title:  
Title:  Put up the tooting we'pon, and teach your throat modesty. Five words of
Title:  plain and comprehendible English are worth just now an hour of squalling.
Title:  
Title:  What art thou? demanded David, utterly disqualified to pursue his original
Title:  intention, and nearly gasping for breath.
Title:  
Title:  A man like yourself; and one whose blood is as little tainted by the cross
Title:  of a bear, or an Indian, as your own. Have you so soon forgotten from whom
Title:  you received the foolish instrument you hold in your hand?
Title:  
Title:  Can these things be? returned David, breathing more freely, as the truth
Title:  began to dawn upon him. I have found many marvels during my sojourn with the
Title:  heathen, but surely nothing to excel this.
Title:  
Title:  Come, come, returned Hawkeye, uncasing his honest countenance, the better to
Title:  assure the wavering confidence of his companion; you may see a skin, which,
Title:  if it be not as white as one of the gentle ones, has no tinge of red to it
Title:  that the winds of the heaven and the sun have not bestowed. Now let us to
Title:  business.
Title:  
Title:  First tell me of the maiden, and of the youth who so bravely sought her,
Title:  interrupted David.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, they are happily freed from the tomahawks of these varlets. But can you
Title:  put me on the scent of Uncas?
Title:  
Title:  The young man is in bondage, and much I fear his death is decreed. I greatly
Title:  mourn that one so well disposed should die in his ignorance, and I have
Title:  sought a goodly hymn - -
Title:  
Title:  Can you lead me to him?
Title:  
Title:  The task will not be difficult, returned David, hesitating; though I greatly
Title:  fear your presence would rather increase than mitigate his unhappy fortunes.
Title:  
Title:  No more words, but lead on, returned Hawkeye, concealing his face again, and
Title:  setting the example in his own person, by instantly quitting the lodge.
Title:  
Title:  As they proceeded, the scout ascertained that his companion found access to
Title:  Uncas, under privilege of his imaginary infirmity, aided by the favor he had
Title:  acquired with one of the guards, who, in consequence of speaking a little
Title:  English, had been selected by David as the subject of a religious
Title:  conversion. How far the Huron comprehended the intentions of his new friend
Title:  may well be doubted; but as exclusive attention is as flattering to a savage
Title:  as to a more civilized individual, it had produced the effect we have
Title:  mentioned. It is unnecessary to repeat the shrewd manner with which the
Title:  scout extracted these particulars from the simple David; neither shall we
Title:  dwell in this place on the nature of the instruction he delivered, when
Title:  completely master of all the necessary facts; as the whole will be
Title:  sufficiently explained to the reader in the course of the narrative.
Title:  
Title:  The lodge in which Uncas was confined was in the very center of the village,
Title:  and in a situation, perhaps, more difficult than any other to approach, or
Title:  leave, without observation. But it was not the policy of Hawkeye to affect
Title:  the least concealment. Presuming on his disguise, and his ability to sustain
Title:  the character he had assumed, he took the most plain and direct route to the
Title:  place. The hour, however, afforded him some little of that protection which
Title:  he appeared so much to despise. The boys were already buried in sleep, and
Title:  all the women, and most of the warriors, had retired to their lodges for the
Title:  night. Four or five of the latter only lingered about the door of the prison
Title:  of Uncas, wary by close observers of the manner of their captive.
Title:  
Title:  At the sight of Gamut, accompanied by one in the well-known masquerade of
Title:  their most distinguished conjurer, they readily made way for them both.
Title:  Still they betrayed no intention to depart. On the other hand, they were
Title:  evidently disposed to remain bound to the place by an additional interest in
Title:  the mysterious mummeries that they of course expected from such a visit.
Title:  
Title:  From the total inability of the scout to address the Hurons in their own
Title:  language, he was compelled to trust the conversation entirely to David.
Title:  Notwithstanding the simplicity of the latter, he did ample justice to the
Title:  instructions he had received, more than fulfilling the strongest hopes of
Title:  his teacher.
Title:  
Title:  The Delawares are women! he exclaimed, addressing himself to the savage who
Title:  had a slight understanding of the language in which he spoke; the Yengeese,
Title:  my foolish countrymen, have told them to take up the tomahawk, and strike
Title:  their fathers in the Canadas, and they have forgotten their sex. Does my
Title:  brother wish to hear Le Cerf Agile ask for his petticoats, and see him weep
Title:  before the Hurons, at the stake?
Title:  
Title:  The exclamation Hugh! delivered in a strong tone of assent, announced the
Title:  gratification the savage would receive in witnessing such an exhibition of
Title:  weakness in an enemy so long hated and so much feared.
Title:  
Title:  Then let him step aside, and the cunning man will blow upon the dog. Tell it
Title:  to my brothers.
Title:  
Title:  The Huron explained the meaning of David to his fellows, who, in their turn,
Title:  listened to the project with that sort of satisfaction that their untamed
Title:  spirits might be expected to find in such a refinement in cruelty. They drew
Title:  back a little from the entrance and motioned to the supposed conjurer to
Title:  enter. But the bear, instead of obeying, maintained the seat it had taken,
Title:  and growled:
Title:  
Title:  The cunning man is afraid that his breath will blow upon his brothers, and
Title:  take away their courage too, continued David, improving the hint he
Title:  received; they must stand further off.
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons, who would have deemed such a misfortune the heaviest calamity
Title:  that could befall them, fell back in a body, taking a position where they
Title:  were out of earshot, though at the same time they could command a view of
Title:  the entrance to the lodge. Then, as if satisfied of their safety, the scout
Title:  left his position, and slowly entered the place. It was silent and gloomy,
Title:  being tenanted solely by the captive, and lighted by the dying embers of a
Title:  fire, which had been used for the purposed of cookery.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas occupied a distant corner, in a reclining attitude, being rigidly
Title:  bound, both hands and feet, by strong and painful withes. When the frightful
Title:  object first presented itself to the young Mohican, he did not deign to
Title:  bestow a single glance on the animal. The scout, who had left David at the
Title:  door, to ascertain they were not observed, thought it prudent to preserve
Title:  his disguise until assured of their privacy. Instead of speaking, therefore,
Title:  he exerted himself to enact one of the antics of the animal he represented.
Title:  The young Mohican, who at first believed his enemies had sent in a real
Title:  beast to torment him, and try his nerves, detected in those performances
Title:  that to Heyward had appeared so accurate, certain blemishes, that at once
Title:  betrayed the counterfeit. Had Hawkeye been aware of the low estimation in
Title:  which the skilful Uncas held his representations, he would probably have
Title:  prolonged the entertainment a little in pique. But the scornful expression
Title:  of the young man's eye admitted of so many constructions, that the worthy
Title:  scout was spared the mortification of such a discovery. As soon, therefore,
Title:  as David gave the preconcerted signal, a low hissing sound was heard in the
Title:  lodge in place of the fierce growlings of the bear.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas had cast his body back against the wall of the hut and closed his
Title:  eyes, as if willing to exclude so contemptible and disagreeable an object
Title:  from his sight. But the moment the noise of the serpent was heard, he arose,
Title:  and cast his looks on each side of him, bending his head low, and turning it
Title:  inquiringly in every direction, until his keen eye rested on the shaggy
Title:  monster, where it remained riveted, as though fixed by the power of a charm.
Title:  Again the same sounds were repeated, evidently proceeding from the mouth of
Title:  the beast. Once more the eyes of the youth roamed over the interior of the
Title:  lodge, and returning to the former resting place, he uttered, in a deep,
Title:  suppressed voice:
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye!
Title:  
Title:  Cut his bands, said Hawkeye to David, who just then approached them.
Title:  
Title:  The singer did as he was ordered, and Uncas found his limbs released. At the
Title:  same moment the dried skin of the animal rattled, and presently the scout
Title:  arose to his feet, in proper person. The Mohican appeared to comprehend the
Title:  nature of the attempt his friend had made, intuitively, neither tongue nor
Title:  feature betraying another symptom of surprise. When Hawkeye had cast his
Title:  shaggy vestment, which was done by simply loosing certain thongs of skin, he
Title:  drew a long, glittering knife, and put it in the hands of Uncas.
Title:  
Title:  The red Hurons are without, he said; let us be ready. At the same time he
Title:  laid hisfinger significantly on another similar weapon, both being the
Title:  fruits of his prowess among their enemies during the evening.
Title:  
Title:  We will go, said Uncas.
Title:  
Title:  Whither?
Title:  
Title:  To the Tortoises; they are the children of my grandfathers.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, lad, said the scout in English - a language he was apt to use when a
Title:  little abstracted in mind; the same blood runs in your veins, I believe; but
Title:  time and distance has a little changed its color. What shall we do with the
Title:  Mingoes at the door? They count six, and this singer is as good as nothing.
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons are boasters, said Uncas, scornfully; their totem is a moose, and
Title:  they run like snails. The Delawares are children of the tortoise, and they
Title:  outstrip the deer.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, lad, there is truth in what you say; and I doubt not, on a rush, you
Title:  would pass the whole nation; and, in a straight race of two miles, would be
Title:  in, and get your breath again, afore a knave of them all was within hearing
Title:  of the other village. But the gift of a white man lies more in his arms than
Title:  in his legs. As for myself, I can brain a Huron as well as a better man; but
Title:  when it comes to a race the knaves would prove too much for me.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas, who had already approached the door, in readiness to lead the way,
Title:  now recoiled, and placed himself, once more, in the bottom of the lodge. But
Title:  Hawkeye, who was too much occupied with his own thoughts to note the
Title:  movement, continued speaking more to himself than to his companion.
Title:  
Title:  After all, he said, it is unreasonable to keep one man in bondage to the
Title:  gifts of another. So, Uncas, you had better take the lead, while I will put
Title:  on the skin again, and trust to cunning for want of speed.
Title:  
Title:  The young Mohican made no reply, but quietly folded his arms, and leaned his
Title:  body against one of the upright posts that supported the wall of the hut.
Title:  
Title:  Well, said the scout looking up at him, why do you tarry? There will be time
Title:  enough for me, as the knaves will give chase to you at first.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas will stay, was the calm reply.
Title:  
Title:  For what?
Title:  
Title:  To fight with his father's brother, and die with the friend of the
Title:  Delawares.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, lad, returned Hawkeye, squeezing the hand of Uncas between his own iron
Title:  fingers; 'twould have been more like a Mingo than a Mohican had you left me.
Title:  But I thought I would make the offer, seeing that youth commonly loves life.
Title:  Well, what can't be done by main courage, in war, must be done by
Title:  circumvention. Put on the skin; I doubt not you can play the bear nearly as
Title:  well as myself.
Title:  
Title:  Whatever might have been the private opinion of Uncas of their respective
Title:  abilities in this particular, his grave countenance manifested no opinion of
Title:  his superiority. He silently and expeditiously encased himself in the
Title:  covering of the beast, and then awaited such other movements as his more
Title:  aged companion saw fit to dictate.
Title:  
Title:  Now, friend, said Hawkeye, addressing David, an exchange of garments will be
Title:  a great convenience to you, inasmuch as you are but little accustomed to the
Title:  make-shifts of the wilderness. Here, take my hunting shirt and cap, and give
Title:  me your blanket and hat. You must trust me with the book and spectacles, as
Title:  well as the tooter, too; if we ever meet again, in better times, you shall
Title:  have all back again, with many thanks into the bargain.
Title:  
Title:  David parted with the several articles named with a readiness that would
Title:  have done great credit to his liberality, had he not certainly profited, in
Title:  many particulars, by the exchange. Hawkeye was not long in assuming his
Title:  borrowed garments; and when his restless eyes were hid behind the glasses,
Title:  and his head was surmounted by the triangular beaver, as their statures were
Title:  not dissimilar, he might readily have passed for the singer, by starlight.
Title:  As soon as these dispositions were made, the scout turned to David, and gave
Title:  him his parting instructions.
Title:  
Title:  Are you much given to cowardice? he bluntly asked, by way of obtaining a
Title:  suitable understanding of the whole case before he ventured a prescription.
Title:  
Title:  My pursuits are peaceful, and my temper, I humbly trust, is greatly given to
Title:  mercy and love, returned David, a little nettled at so direct an attack on
Title:  his manhood; but there are none who can say that I have ever forgotten my
Title:  faith in the Lord, even in the greatest straits.
Title:  
Title:  Your chiefest danger will be at the moment when the savages find out that
Title:  they have been deceived. If you are not then knocked on the head, your being
Title:  a non-composser will protect you; and you'll then have a good reason to
Title:  expect to die in your bed. If you stay, it must be to sit down here in the
Title:  shadow, and take the part of Uncas, until such times as the cunning of the
Title:  Indians discover the cheat, when, as I have already said, your times of
Title:  trial will come. So choose for yourself - to make a rush or tarry here.
Title:  
Title:  Even so, said David, firmly; I will abide in the place of the Delaware.
Title:  Bravely and generously has he battled in my behalf, and this, and more, will
Title:  I dare in his service.
Title:  
Title:  You have spoken as a man, and like one who, under wiser schooling, would
Title:  have been brought to better things. Hold your head down, and draw in your
Title:  legs; their formation might tell the truth too early. Keep silent as long as
Title:  may be; and it would be wise, when you do speak, to break out suddenly in
Title:  one of your shoutings, which will serve to remind the Indians that you are
Title:  not altogether as responsible as men should be. If however, they take your
Title:  scalp, as I trust and believe they will not, depend on it, Uncas and I will
Title:  not forget the deed, but revenge it as becomes true warriors and trusty
Title:  friends.
Title:  
Title:  Hold! said David, perceiving that with this assurance they were about to
Title:  leave him; I am an unworthy and humble follower of one who taught not the
Title:  damnable principle of revenge. Should I fall, therefore, seek no victims to
Title:  my manes, but rather forgive my destroyers; and if you remember them at all,
Title:  let it be in prayers for the enlightening of their minds, and for their
Title:  eternal welfare.
Title:  
Title:  The scout hesitated, and appeared to muse.
Title:  
Title:  There is a principle in that, he said, different from the law of the woods;
Title:  and yet it is fair and noble to reflect upon. Then heaving a heavy sigh,
Title:  probably among the last he ever drew in pining for a condition he had so
Title:  long abandoned, he added: it is what I would wish to practise myself, as one
Title:  without a cross of blood, though it is not always easy to deal with an
Title:  Indian as you would with a fellow Christian. God bless you, friend; I do
Title:  believe your scent is not greatly wrong, when the matter is duly considered,
Title:  and keeping eternity before the eyes, though much depends on the natural
Title:  gifts, and the force of temptation.
Title:  
Title:  So saying, the scout returned and shook David cordially by the hand; after
Title:  which act of friendship he immediately left the lodge, attended by the new
Title:  representative of the beast.
Title:  
Title:  The instant Hawkeye found himself under the observation of the Hurons, he
Title:  drew up his tall form in the rigid manner of David, threw out his arm in the
Title:  act of keeping time, and commenced what he intended for an imitation of his
Title:  psalmody. Happily for the success of this delicate adventure, he had to deal
Title:  with ears but little practised in the concord of sweet sounds, or the
Title:  miserable effort would infallibly have been detected. It was necessary to
Title:  pass within a dangerous proximity of the dark group of the savages, and the
Title:  voice of the scout grew louder as they drew nigher. When at the nearest
Title:  point the Huron who spoke the English thrust out an arm, and stopped the
Title:  supposed singing-master.
Title:  
Title:  The Delaware dog! he said, leaning forward, and peering through the dim
Title:  light to catch the expression of the other's features; is he afraid? Will
Title:  the Hurons hear his groans?
Title:  
Title:  A growl, so exceedingly fierce and natural, proceeded from the beast, that
Title:  the young Indian released his hold and started aside, as if to assure
Title:  himself that it was not a veritable bear, and no counterfeit, that was
Title:  rolling before him. Hawkeye, who feared his voice would betray him to his
Title:  subtle enemies, gladly profited by the interruption, to break out anew in
Title:  such a burst of muscial expression as would, probably, in a more refined
Title:  state of society have been termed a grand crash. Among his actual auditors,
Title:  however, it merely gave him an additional claim to that respect which they
Title:  never withhold from such as are believed to be the subjects of mental
Title:  alienation. The little knot on Indians drew back in a body, and suffered, as
Title:  they thought, the conjurer and his inspired assistant to proceed.
Title:  
Title:  It required no common exercise of fortitude in Uncas and the scout to
Title:  continue the dignified and deliberate pace they had assumed in passing the
Title:  lodge; especially as they immediately perceived that curiosity had so far
Title:  mastered fear, as to induce the watchers to approach the hut, in order to
Title:  witness the effect of the incantations. The least injudicious or impatient
Title:  movement on the part of David might betray them, and time was absolutely
Title:  necessary to insure the safety of the scout. The loud noise the latter
Title:  conceived it politic to continue, drew many curious gazers to the doors of
Title:  the different huts as thy passed; and once or twice a dark-looking warrior
Title:  stepped across their path, led to the act by superstition and watchfulness.
Title:  They were not, however, interrupted, the darkness of the hour, and the
Title:  boldness of the attempt, proving their principal friends.
Title:  
Title:  The adventurers had got clear of the village, and were now swiftly
Title:  approaching the shelter of the woods, when a loud and long cry arose from
Title:  the lodge where Uncas had been confined. The Mohican started on his feet,
Title:  and shook his shaggy covering, as though the animal he counterfeited was
Title:  about to make some desperate effort.
Title:  
Title:  Hold! said the scout, grasping his friend by the shoulder, let them yell
Title:  again! 'Twas nothing but wonderment.
Title:  
Title:  He had no occasion to delay, for at the next instant a burst of cries filled
Title:  the outer air, and ran along the whole extent of the village. Uncas cast his
Title:  skin, and stepped forth in his own beautiful proportions. Hawkeye tapped him
Title:  lightly on the shoulder, and glided ahead.
Title:  
Title:  Now let the devils strike our scent! said the scout, tearing two rifles,
Title:  with all their attendant accouterments, from beneath a bush, and flourishing
Title:  killdeer as he handed Uncas his weapon; two, at least, will find it to their
Title:  deaths.
Title:  
Title:  Then, throwing their pieces to a low trail, like sportsmen in readiness for
Title:  their game, they dashed forward, and were soon buried in the somber darkness
Title:  of the forest.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 27
Title:  
Title:       Antony: I shall remember:
Title:       When Caesar says Do this, it is performed
Title:  
Title:                                                      JULIUS C&AELIG;SAR
Title:  
Title:  The impatience of the savages who lingered about the prison of Uncas, as has
Title:  been seen, had overcome their dread of the conjurer's breath. They stole
Title:  cautiously, and with beating hearts, to a crevice, through which the faint
Title:  light of the fire was glimmering. For several minutes they mistook the form
Title:  of David for that of the prisoner; but the very accident which Hawkeye had
Title:  foreseen occurred. Tired of keeping the extremities of his long person so
Title:  near together, the singer gradually suffered the lower limbs to extend
Title:  themselves, until one of his misshapen feet actually came in contact with
Title:  and shoved aside the embers of the fire. At first the Hurons believed the
Title:  Delaware had been thus deformed by witchcraft. But when David, unconscious
Title:  of being observed, turned his head, and exposed his simple, mild
Title:  countenance, in place of the haughty lineaments of their prisoner, it would
Title:  have exceeded the credulity of even a native to have doubted any longer.
Title:  They rushed together into the lodge, and, laying their hands, with but
Title:  little ceremony, on their captive, immediately detected the imposition. They
Title:  arose the cry first heard by the fugitives. It was succeeded by the most
Title:  frantic and angry demonstrations of vengeance. David, however, firm in his
Title:  determination to cover the retreat of his friends, was compelled to believe
Title:  that his own final hour had come. Deprived of his book and his pipe, he was
Title:  fain to trust to a memory that rarely failed him on such subjects; and
Title:  breaking forth in a loud and impassioned strain, he endeavored to smooth his
Title:  passage into the other world by singing the opening verse of a funeral
Title:  anthem. The Indians were seasonably reminded of his infirmity, and, rushing
Title:  into the open air, they aroused the village in the manner described.
Title:  
Title:  A native warrior fights as he sleeps, without the protection of anything
Title:  defensive. The sounds of the alarm were, therefore, hardly uttered before
Title:  two hundred men were afoot, and ready for the battle or the chase, as either
Title:  might be required. The escape was soon known; and the whole tribe crowded,
Title:  in a body, around the council-lodge, impatiently awaiting the instruction of
Title:  their chiefs. In such a sudden demand on their wisdom, the presence of the
Title:  cunning Magua could scarcely fail of being needed. His name was mentioned,
Title:  and all looked round in wonder that he did not appear. Messengers were then
Title:  despatched to his lodge requiring his presence.
Title:  
Title:  In the meantime, some of the swiftest and most discreet of the young men
Title:  were ordered to make the circuit of the clearing, under cover of the woods,
Title:  in order to ascertain that their suspected neighbors, the Delawares,
Title:  designed no mischief. Women and children ran to and fro; and, in short, the
Title:  whole encampment exhibited another scene of wild and savage confusion.
Title:  Gradually, however, these symptoms of disorder diminished; and in a few
Title:  minutes the oldest and most distinguished chiefs were assembled in the
Title:  lodge, in grave consultation.
Title:  
Title:  The clamor of many voices soon announced that a party approached, who might
Title:  be expected to communicate some intelligence that would explain the mystery
Title:  of the novel surprise. The crowd without gave way, and several warriors
Title:  entered the place, bringing with them the hapless conjurer, who had been
Title:  left so long by the scout in duress.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding this man was held in very unequal estimation among the
Title:  Hurons, some believing implicitly in his power, and others deeming him an
Title:  imposter, he was now listened to by all with the deepest attention. When his
Title:  brief story was ended, the father of the sick woman stepped forth, and, in a
Title:  few pithy expression, related, in his turn, what he knew. These two
Title:  narratives gave a proper direction to the subsequent inquiries, which were
Title:  now made with the characteristic cunning of savages.
Title:  
Title:  Instead of rushing in a confused and disorderly throng to the cavern, ten of
Title:  the wisest and firmest among the chiefs were selected to prosecute the
Title:  investigation. As no time was to be lost, the instant the choice was made
Title:  the individuals appointed rose in a body and left the place without
Title:  speaking. On reaching the entrance, the younger men in advance made way for
Title:  their seniors; and the whole proceeded along the low, dark gallery, with the
Title:  firmness of warriors ready to devote themselves to the public good, though,
Title:  at the same time, secretly doubting the nature of the power with which they
Title:  were about to contend.
Title:  
Title:  The outer apartment of the cavern was silent and gloomy. The woman lay in
Title:  her usual place and posture, though there were those present who affirmed
Title:  they had seen her borne to the woods by the supposed medicine of the white
Title:  men. Such a direct and palpable contradiction of the tale related by the
Title:  father caused all eyes to be turned on him. Chafed by the silent imputation,
Title:  and inwardly troubled by so unaccountable a circumstance, the chief advanced
Title:  to the side of the bed, and, stooping, cast an incredulous look at the
Title:  features, as if distrusting their reality. His daughter was dead.
Title:  
Title:  The unerring feeling of nature for a moment prevailed and the old warrior
Title:  hid his eyes in sorrow. Then, recovering his self-possession, he faced his
Title:  companions, and, pointing toward the corpse, he said, in the language of his
Title:  people:
Title:  
Title:  The wife of my young man has left us! The Great Spirit is angry with his
Title:  children.
Title:  
Title:  The mournful intelligence was received in solemn silence. After a short
Title:  pause, one of the elder Indians was about to speak, when a dark-looking
Title:  object was seen rolling out of an adjoining apartment, into the very center
Title:  of the room where they stood. Ignorant of the nature of the beings they had
Title:  to deal with, the whole party drew back a little, and, rising on end,
Title:  exhibited the distorted but still fierce and sullen features of Magua. The
Title:  discovery was succeeded by a general exclamation of amazement.
Title:  
Title:  As soon, however, as the true situation of the chief was understood, several
Title:  knives appeared, and his limbs and tongue were quickly released. The Huron
Title:  arose, and shook himself like a lion quitting his lair. Not a word escaped
Title:  him, though his hand played convulsively with the handle of his knife, while
Title:  his lowering eyes scanned the whole party, as if they sought an object
Title:  suited to the first burst of his vengeance.
Title:  
Title:  It was happy for Uncas and the scout, and even David, that they were all
Title:  beyond the reach of his arm at such a moment; for, assuredly, no refinement
Title:  in cruelty would then have deferred their deaths, in opposition to the
Title:  promptings of the fierce temper that nearly choked him. Meeting everywhere
Title:  faces that he knew as friends, the savage grated his teeth together like
Title:  rasps of iron, and swallowed his passion for want of a victim on whom to
Title:  vent it. This exhibition of anger was noted by all present; and from an
Title:  apprehension of exasperating a temper that was already chafed nearly to
Title:  madness, several minutes were suffered to pass before another word was
Title:  uttered. When, however, suitable time had elapsed, the oldest of the party
Title:  spoke.
Title:  
Title:  My friend has found an enemy, he said. Is he nigh that the Hurons might take
Title:  revenge?
Title:  
Title:  Let the Delaware die! exclaimed Magua, in a voice of thunder.
Title:  
Title:  Another longer and expressive silence was observed, and was broken, as
Title:  before, with due precaution, by the same individual.
Title:  
Title:  The Mohican is swift of foot, and leaps far, he said; but my young men are
Title:  on his trail.
Title:  
Title:  Is he gone? demanded Magua, in tones so deep and gutteral, that they seemed
Title:  to proceed from his inmost chest.
Title:  
Title:  An evil spirit has been among us, and the Delaware has blinded our eyes.
Title:  
Title:  An evil spirit! repeated the other, mockingly; 'tis the spirit that has
Title:  taken the lives of so many Hurons; the spirit that slew my young men at the
Title:  tumbling river'; that took their scalps at the healing spring'; and who has,
Title:  now, bound the arms of Le Renard Subtil!
Title:  
Title:  Of whom does my friend speak?
Title:  
Title:  Of the dog who carries the heart and cunning of a Huron under a pale skin -
Title:  La Longue Carabine.
Title:  
Title:  The pronunciation of so terrible a name produced the usual effect among his
Title:  auditors. But when time was given for reflection, and the warriors
Title:  remembered that their formidable and daring enemy had even been in the bosom
Title:  of their encampment, working injury, fearful rage took the place of wonder,
Title:  and all those fierce passions with which the bosom of Magua had just been
Title:  struggling were suddenly transferred to his companions. Some among them
Title:  gnashed their teeth in anger, others vented their feelings in yells, and
Title:  some, again, beat the air as frantically as if the object of their
Title:  resentment were suffering under their blows. But this sudden outbreaking of
Title:  temper as quickly subsided in the still and sullen restraint they most
Title:  affected in their moments of inaction.
Title:  
Title:  Magua, who had in his turn found leisure for reflection, now changed his
Title:  manner, and assumed the air of one who knew how to think and act with a
Title:  dignity worthy of so grave a subject.
Title:  
Title:  Let us go to my people, he said; they wait for us.
Title:  
Title:  His companions consented in silence, and the whole of the savage party left
Title:  the cavern and returned to the council-lodge. When they were seated, all
Title:  eyes turned on Magua, who understood, from such an indication, that, by
Title:  common consent, they had devolved the duty of relating what had passed on
Title:  him. He arose, and told his tale without duplicity or reservation. The whole
Title:  deception practised by both Duncan and Hawkeye was, of course, laid naked,
Title:  and no room was found, even for the most superstitious of the tribe, any
Title:  longer to affix a doubt on the character of the occurrences. It was but too
Title:  apparent that they had been insultingly, shamefully, disgracefully deceived.
Title:  When he had ended, and resumed his seat, the collected tribe - for his
Title:  auditors, in substance, included all the fighting men of the party - sat
Title:  regarding each other like men astonished equally at the audacity and the
Title:  success of their enemies. The next consideration, however, was the means and
Title:  opportunities for revenge.
Title:  
Title:  Additional pursuers were sent on the trail of the fugitives; and then the
Title:  chiefs applied themselves, in earnest, to the business of consultation. Many
Title:  different expedients were proposed by the elder warriors, in succession, to
Title:  all of which Magua was a silent and respectful listener. That subtle savage
Title:  had recovered his artifice and self-command, and now proceeded toward his
Title:  object with his customary caution and skill. It was only when each one
Title:  disposed to speak had uttered his sentiments, that he prepared to advance
Title:  his own opinions. They were given with additional weight from the
Title:  circumstance that some of the runners had already returned, and reported
Title:  that their enemies had been traced so far as to leave no doubt of their
Title:  having sought safety in the neighboring camp of their suspected allies, the
Title:  Delawares. With the advantage of possessing this important intelligence, the
Title:  chief warily laid his plans before his fellows, and, as might have been
Title:  anticipated from his eloquence and cunning, they were adopted without a
Title:  dissenting voice. They were, briefly, as follows, both in opinions and in
Title:  motives.
Title:  
Title:  It has been already stated that, in obedience to a policy rarely departed
Title:  from, the sisters were separated so soon as they reached the Huron village.
Title:  Magua had early discovered that in retaining the person of Alice, he
Title:  possessed the most effectual check on Cora. When they parted, therefore, he
Title:  kept the former within reach of his hand, consigning the one he most valued
Title:  to the keeping of their allies. The arrangement was understood to be merely
Title:  temporary, and was made as much with a view to flatter his neighbors as in
Title:  obedience to the invariable rule of Indian policy.
Title:  
Title:  While goaded incessantly by these revengeful impulses that in a savage
Title:  seldom slumber, the chief was still attentive to his more permanent personal
Title:  interests. The follies and disloyalty committed in his youth were to be
Title:  expiated by a long and painful penance, ere he could be restored to the full
Title:  enjoyment of the confidence of his ancient people; and without confidence
Title:  there could be no authority in an Indian tribe. In this delicate and arduous
Title:  situation, the crafty native had neglected no means of increasing his
Title:  influence; and one of the happiest of his expedients had been the success
Title:  with which he had cultivated the favor of their powerful and dangerous
Title:  neighbors. The result of his experiment had answered all the expectations of
Title:  his policy; for the Hurons were in no degree exempt from that governing
Title:  principle of nature, which induces man to value his gifts precisely in the
Title:  degree that they are appreciated by others.
Title:  
Title:  But, while he was making this ostensible sacrifice to general
Title:  considerations, Magua never lost sight of his individual motives. The latter
Title:  had been frustrated by the unlooked-for events which had placed all his
Title:  prisoners beyond his control; and he now found himself reduced to the
Title:  necessity of suing for favors to those whom it had so lately been his policy
Title:  to oblige.
Title:  
Title:  Several of the chiefs had proposed deep and treacherous schemes to surprise
Title:  the Delawares and, by gaining possession of their camp, to recover their
Title:  prisoners by the same blow; for all agreed that their honor, their
Title:  interests, and the peace and happiness of their dead countrymen, imperiously
Title:  required them speedily to immolate some victims to their revenge. But plans
Title:  so dangerous to attempt, and of such doubtful issue, Magua found little
Title:  difficulty in defeating. He exposed their risk and fallacy with his usual
Title:  skill; and it was only after he had removed every impediment, in the shape
Title:  of opposing advice, that he ventured to propose his own projects.
Title:  
Title:  He commenced by flattering the self-love of his auditors; a never-failing
Title:  method of commanding attention. When he had enumerated the many different
Title:  occasions on which the Hurons had exhibited their courage and prowess, in
Title:  the punishment of insults, he digressed in a high encomium on the virtue of
Title:  wisdom. He painted the quality as forming the great point of difference
Title:  between the beaver and other brutes; between the brutes and men; and,
Title:  finally, between the Hurons, in particular, and the rest of the human race.
Title:  After he had sufficiently extolled the property of discretion, he undertook
Title:  to exhibit in what manner its use was applicable to the present situation of
Title:  their tribe. On the one hand, he said, was their great pale father, the
Title:  governor of the Canadas, who had looked upon his children with a hard eye
Title:  since their tomahawks had been so red; on the other, a people as numerous as
Title:  themselves, who spoke a different language, possessed different interests,
Title:  and loved them not, and who would be glad of any pretense to bring them in
Title:  disgrace with the great white chief. Then he spoke of their necessities; of
Title:  the gifts they had a right to expect for their past services; of their
Title:  distance from their proper hunting-grounds and native villages; and of the
Title:  necessity of consulting prudence more, and inclination less, in so critical
Title:  circumstances. When he perceived that, while the old men applauded his
Title:  moderation, many of the fiercest and most distinguished of the warriors
Title:  listened to these politic plans with lowering looks, he cunningly led them
Title:  back to the subject which they most loved. He spoke openly of the fruits of
Title:  their wisdom, which he boldly pronounced would be a complete and final
Title:  triumph over their enemies. He even darkly hinted that their success might
Title:  be extended, with proper caution, in such a manner as to include the
Title:  destruction of all whom they had reason to hate. In short, he so blended the
Title:  warlike with the artful, the obvious with the obscure, as to flatter the
Title:  propensities of both parties, and to leave to each subject of hope, while
Title:  neither could say it clearly comprehended his intentions.
Title:  
Title:  The orator, or the politician, who can produce such a state of things, is
Title:  commonly popular with his contemporaries, however he may be treated by
Title:  posterity. All perceived that more was meant than was uttered, and each one
Title:  believed that the hidden meaning was precisely such as his own faculties
Title:  enabled him to understand, or his own wishes led him to anticipate.
Title:  
Title:  In this happy state of things, it is not surprising that the management of
Title:  Magua prevailed. The tribe consented to act with deliberation, and with one
Title:  voice they committed the direction of the whole affair to the government of
Title:  the chief who had suggested such wise and intelligible expedients.
Title:  
Title:  Magua had now attained one great object of all his cunning and enterprise.
Title:  The ground he had lost in the favor of his people was completely regained,
Title:  and he found himself even placed at the head of affairs. He was, in truth,
Title:  their ruler; and, so long as he could maintain his popularity, no monarch
Title:  could be more despotic, especially while the tribe continued in a hostile
Title:  country. Throwing off, therefore, the appearance of consultation, he assumed
Title:  the grave air of authority necessary to support the dignity of his office.
Title:  
Title:  Runners were despatched for intelligence in different directions; spies were
Title:  ordered to approach and feel the encampment of the Delawares; the warriors
Title:  were dismissed to their lodges, with an intimation that their services would
Title:  soon be needed; and the women and children were ordered to retire, with a
Title:  warning that it was their province to be silent. When these several
Title:  arrangements were made, Magua passed through the village, stopping here and
Title:  there to pay a visit where he thought his presence might be flattering to
Title:  the individual. He confirmed his friends in their confidence, fixed the
Title:  wavering, and gratified all. Then he sought his own lodge. The wife the
Title:  Huron chief had abandoned, when he was chased from among his people, was
Title:  dead. Children he had none; and he now occupied a hut, without companion of
Title:  any sort. It was, in fact, the dilapidated and solitary structure in which
Title:  David had been discovered, and whom he had tolerated in his presence, on
Title:  those few occasions when they met, with the contemptuous indifference of a
Title:  haughty superiority.
Title:  
Title:  Hither, then, Magua retired, when his labors of policy were ended. While
Title:  others slept, however, he neither knew or sought repose. Had there been one
Title:  sufficiently curious to have watched the movements of the newly elected
Title:  chief, he would have seen him seated in a corner of his lodge, musing on the
Title:  subject of his future plans, from the hour of his retirement to the time he
Title:  had appointed for the warriors to assemble again. Occasionally the air
Title:  breathed through the crevices of the hut, and the low flame that fluttered
Title:  about the embers of the fire threw their wavering light on the person of the
Title:  sullen recluse. At such moments it would not have been difficult to have
Title:  fancied the dusky savage the Prince of Darkness brooding on his own fancied
Title:  wrongs, and plotting evil.
Title:  
Title:  Long before the day dawned, however, warrior after warrior entered the
Title:  solitary hut of Magua, until they had collected to the number of twenty.
Title:  Each bore his rifle, and all the other accouterments of war, though the
Title:  paint was uniformly peaceful. The entrance of these fierce-looking beings
Title:  was unnoticed: some seating themselves in the shadows of the place, and
Title:  others standing like motionless statues, until the whole of the designated
Title:  band was collected.
Title:  
Title:  Then Magua arose and gave the signal to proceed, marching himself in
Title:  advance. They followed their leader singly, and in that well-known order
Title:  which has obtained the distinguishing appellation of Indian file. Unlike
Title:  other men engaged in the spirit-stirring business of war, they stole from
Title:  their camp unostentatiously and unobserved resembling a band of gliding
Title:  specters, more than warriors seeking the bubble reputation by deeds of
Title:  desperate daring.
Title:  
Title:  Instead of taking the path which led directly toward the camp of the
Title:  Delawares, Magua led his party for some distance down the windings of the
Title:  stream, and along the little artificial lake of the beavers. The day began
Title:  to dawn as they entered the clearing which had been formed by those
Title:  sagacious and industrious animals. Though Magua, who had resumed his ancient
Title:  garb, bore the outline of a fox on the dressed skin which formed his robe,
Title:  there was one chief of his party who carried the beaver as his peculiar
Title:  symbol, or totem. There would have been a species of profanity in the
Title:  omission, had this man passed so powerful a community of his fancied
Title:  kindred, without bestowing some evidence of his regard. Accordingly, he
Title:  paused, and spoke in words as kind and friendly as if he were addressing
Title:  more intelligent beings. He called the animals his cousins, and reminded
Title:  them that his protecting influence was the reason they remained unharmed,
Title:  while many avaricious traders were prompting the Indians to take their
Title:  lives. He promised a continuance of his favors, and admonished them to be
Title:  grateful. After which, he spoke of the expedition in which he was himself
Title:  engaged, and intimated, though with sufficient delicacy and circumlocution,
Title:  the expediency of bestowing on their relative a portion of that wisdom for
Title:  which they were so renowned.1
Title:  
Title:  During the utterance of this extraordinary address, the companions of the
Title:  speaker were as grave and as attentive to his language as though they were
Title:  all equally impressed with its propriety. Once or twice black objects were
Title:  seen rising to the surface of the water, and the Huron expressed pleasure,
Title:  conceiving that his words were not bestowed in vain. Just as he ended his
Title:  address, the head of a large beaver was thrust from the door of a lodge,
Title:  whose earthen walls had been much injured, and which the party had believed,
Title:  from its situation, to be uninhabited. Such an extraordinary sign of
Title:  confidence was received by the orator as a highly favorable omen; and though
Title:  the animal retreated a little precipitately, he was lavish of his thanks and
Title:  commendations.
Title:  
Title:  When Magua thought sufficient time had been lost in gratifying the family
Title:  affection of the warrior, he again made the signal to proceed. As the
Title:  Indians moved away in a body, and with a step that would have been inaudible
Title:  to the ears of any common man, the same venerable-looking beaver once more
Title:  ventured his head from its cover. Had any of the Hurons turned to look
Title:  behind them, they would have seen the animal watching their movements with
Title:  an interest and sagacity that might easily have been mistaken for reason.
Title:  Indeed, so very distinct and intelligible were the devices of the quadruped,
Title:  that even the most experienced observer would have been at a loss to account
Title:  for its actions, until the moment when the party entered the forest, when
Title:  the whole would have been explained, by seeing the entire animal issue from
Title:  the lodge, uncasing, by the act, the grave features of Chingachgook from his
Title:  mask of fur.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 These harangues of the beasts were frequent among the Indians. They often
Title:  address their victims in this way, reproaching them for cowardice or
Title:  commending their resolution, as they may happen to exhibit fortitude or the
Title:  reverse, in suffering.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 28
Title:  
Title:       Brief, I pray for you; for you see, 'tis a busy time with me.
Title:  
Title:                                                  Much Ado About Nothing
Title:  
Title:  The tribe, or rather half tribe, of Delawares, which has been so often
Title:  mentioned, and whose present place of encampment was so nigh the temporary
Title:  village of the Hurons, could assemble about an equal number of warriors with
Title:  the latter people. Like their neighbors, they had followed Montcalm into the
Title:  territories of the English crown, and were making heavy and serious inroads
Title:  on the hunting-grounds of the Mohawks; though they had seen fit, with the
Title:  mysterious reserve so common among the natives, to withhold their assistance
Title:  at the moment when it was most required. The French had accounted for this
Title:  unexpected defection on the part of their ally in various ways. It was the
Title:  prevalent opinion, however, that they had been influenced by veneration for
Title:  the ancient treaty, that had once made them dependent on the Six Nations for
Title:  military protection, and now rendered them reluctant to encounter their
Title:  former masters. As for the tribe itself, it had been content to announce to
Title:  Montcalm, through his emissaries, with Indian brevity, that their hatchets
Title:  were dull, and time was necessary to sharpen them. The politic captain of
Title:  the Canadas had deemed it wiser to submit to entertain a passive friend,
Title:  than by any acts of ill-judged severity to convert him into an open enemy.
Title:  
Title:  On that morning when Magua led his silent party from the settlement of the
Title:  beavers into the forests, in the manner described, the sun rose upon the
Title:  Delaware encampment as if it had suddenly burst upon a busy people, actively
Title:  employed in all the customary avocations of high noon. The women ran from
Title:  lodge to lodge, some engaged in preparing their morning's meal, a few
Title:  earnestly bent on seeking the comforts necessary to their habits, but more
Title:  pausing to exchange hasty and whispered sentences with their friends. The
Title:  warriors were lounging in groups, musing more than they conversed and when a
Title:  few words were uttered, speaking like men who deeply weighed their opinions.
Title:  The instruments of the chase were to be seen in abundance among the lodges;
Title:  but none departed. Here and there a warrior was examining his arms, with an
Title:  attention that is rarely bestowed on the implements, when no other enemy
Title:  than the beasts of the forest is expected to be encountered. And
Title:  occasionally, the eyes of a whole group were turned simultaneously toward a
Title:  large and silent lodge in the center of the village, as if it contained the
Title:  subject of their common thoughts.
Title:  
Title:  During the existence of this scene, a man suddenly appeared at the furthest
Title:  extremity of a platform of rock which formed the level of the village. He
Title:  was without arms, and his paint tended rather to soften than increase the
Title:  natural sternness of his austere countenance. When in full view of the
Title:  Delawares he stopped, and made a gesture of amity, by throwing his arm
Title:  upward toward heaven, and then letting it fall impressively on his breast.
Title:  The inhabitants of the village answered his salute by a low murmur of
Title:  welcome, and encouraged him to advance by similar indications of friendship.
Title:  Fortified by these assurances, the dark figure left the brow of the natural
Title:  rocky terrace, where it had stood a moment, drawn in a strong outline
Title:  against the blushing morning sky, and moved with dignity into the very
Title:  center of the huts. As he approached, nothing was audible but the rattling
Title:  of the light silver ornaments that loaded his arms and neck, and the
Title:  tinkling of the little bells that fringed his deerskin moccasins. He made,
Title:  as he advanced, many courteous signs of greeting to the men he passed,
Title:  neglecting to notice the women, however, like one who deemed their favor, in
Title:  the present enterprise, of no importance. When he had reached the group in
Title:  which it was evident, by the haughtiness of their common mien, that the
Title:  principal chiefs were collected, the stranger paused, and then the Delawares
Title:  saw that the active and erect form that stood before them was that of the
Title:  well-known Huron chief, Le Renard Subtil.
Title:  
Title:  His reception was grave, silent, and wary. The warriors in front stepped
Title:  aside, opening the way to their most approved orator by the action; one who
Title:  spoke all those languages that were cultivated among the northern
Title:  aborigines.
Title:  
Title:  The wise Huron is welcome, said the Delaware, in the language of the Maquas;
Title:  he is come to eat his succatash,1 with his brothers of the lakes.
Title:  
Title:  He is come, repeated Magua, bending his head with the dignity of an eastern
Title:  prince.
Title:  
Title:  The chief extended his arm and taking the other by the wrist, they once more
Title:  exchanged friendly salutations. Then the Delaware invited his guest to enter
Title:  his own lodge, and share his morning meal. The invitation was accepted; and
Title:  the two warriors, attended by three or four of the old men, walked calmly
Title:  away, leaving the rest of the tribe devoured by a desire to understand the
Title:  reasons of so unusual a visit, and yet not betraying the least impatience by
Title:  sign or word.
Title:  
Title:  During the short and frugal repast that followed, the conversation was
Title:  extremely circumspect, and related entirely to the events of the hunt, in
Title:  which Magua had so lately been engaged. It would have been impossible for
Title:  the most finished breeding to wear more of the appearance of considering the
Title:  visit as a thing of course, than did his hosts, notwithstanding every
Title:  individual present was perfectly aware that it must be connected with some
Title:  secret object and that probably of importance to themselves. When the
Title:  appetites of the whole were appeased, the squaws removed the trenchers and
Title:  gourds, and the two parties began to prepare themselves for a subtle trial
Title:  of their wits.
Title:  
Title:  Is the face of my great Canada father turned again toward his Huron
Title:  children? demanded the orator of the Delawares.
Title:  
Title:  When was it ever otherwise? returned Magua. He calls my people most beloved.
Title:  
Title:  The Delaware gravely bowed his acquiescence to what he knew to be false, and
Title:  continued:
Title:  
Title:  The tomahawks of your young men have been very red.
Title:  
Title:  It is so; but they are now bright and dull; for the Yengeese are dead, and
Title:  the Delawares are our neighbors.
Title:  
Title:  The other acknowledged the pacific compliment by a gesture of the hand, and
Title:  remained silent. Then Magua, as if recalled to such a recollection, by the
Title:  allusion to the massacre, demanded:
Title:  
Title:  Does my prisoner give trouble to my brothers?
Title:  
Title:  She is welcome.
Title:  
Title:  The path between the Hurons and the Delawares is short and it is open; let
Title:  her be sent to my squaws, if she gives trouble to my brother.
Title:  
Title:  She is welcome, returned the chief of the latter nation, still more
Title:  emphatically.
Title:  
Title:  The baffled Magua continued silent several minutes, apparently indifferent,
Title:  however, to the repulse he had received in this his opening effort to regain
Title:  possession of Cora.
Title:  
Title:  Do my young men leave the Delawares room on the mountains for their hunts?
Title:  he at length continued.
Title:  
Title:  The Lenape are rulers of their own hills, returned the other a little
Title:  haughtily.
Title:  
Title:  It is well. Justice is the master of a red-skin. Why should they brighten
Title:  their tomahawks and sharpen their knives against each other? Are not the
Title:  pale faces thicker than the swallows in the season of flowers?
Title:  
Title:  Good! exclaimed two or three of his auditors at the same time.
Title:  
Title:  Magua waited a little, to permit his words to soften the feelings of the
Title:  Delawares, before he added:
Title:  
Title:  Have there not been strange moccasins in the woods? Have not my brothers
Title:  scented the feet of white men?
Title:  
Title:  Let my Canada father come, returned the other, evasively; his children are
Title:  ready to see him.
Title:  
Title:  When the great chief comes, it is to smoke with the Indians in their
Title:  wigwams. The Hurons say, too, he is welcome. But the Yengeese have long
Title:  arms, and legs that never tire! My young men dreamed they had seen the trail
Title:  of the Yengeese nigh the village of the Delawares!
Title:  
Title:  They will not find the Lenape asleep.
Title:  
Title:  It is well. The warrior whose eye is open can see his enemy, said Magua,
Title:  once more shifting his ground, when he found himself unable to penetrate the
Title:  caution of his companion. I have brought gifts to my brother. His nation
Title:  would not go on the warpath, because they did not think it well, but their
Title:  friends have remembered where they lived.
Title:  
Title:  When he had thus announced his liberal intention, the crafty chief arose,
Title:  and gravely spread his presents before the dazzled eyes of his hosts. They
Title:  consisted principally of trinkets of little value, plundered from the
Title:  slaughtered females of William Henry. In the division of the baubles the
Title:  cunning Huron discovered no less art than in their selection. While he
Title:  bestowed those of greater value on the two most distinguished warriors, one
Title:  of whom was his host, he seasoned his offerings to their inferiors with such
Title:  well-timed and apposite compliments, as left them no ground of complaint. In
Title:  short, the whole ceremony contained such a happy blending of the profitable
Title:  with the flattering, that it was not difficult for the donor immediately to
Title:  read the effect of a generosity so aptly mingled with praise, in the eyes of
Title:  those he addressed.
Title:  
Title:  This well-judged and politic stroke on the part of Magua was not without
Title:  instantaneous results. The Delawares lost their gravity in a much more
Title:  cordial expression; and the host, in particular, after contemplating his own
Title:  liberal share of the spoil for some moments with peculiar gratification,
Title:  repeated with strong emphasis, the words:
Title:  
Title:  My brother is a wise chief. He is welcome.
Title:  
Title:  The Hurons love their friends the Delawares, returned Magua. Why should they
Title:  not? they are colored by the same sun, and their just men will hunt in the
Title:  same grounds after death. The red-skins should be friends, and look with
Title:  open eyes on the white men. Has not my brother scented spies in the woods?
Title:  
Title:  The Delaware, whose name in English signified Hard Heart, an appellation
Title:  that the French had translated into le Coeur-dur, forgot that obduracy of
Title:  purpose, which had probably obtained him so significant a title. His
Title:  countenance grew very sensibly less stern and he now deigned to answer more
Title:  directly.
Title:  
Title:  There have been strange moccasins about my camp. They have been tracked into
Title:  my lodges.
Title:  
Title:  Did my brother beat out the dogs? asked Magua, without adverting in any
Title:  manner to the former equivocation of the chief.
Title:  
Title:  It would not do. The stranger is always welcome to the children of the
Title:  Lenape.
Title:  
Title:  The stranger, but not the spy.
Title:  
Title:  Would the Yengeese send their women as spies? Did not the Huron chief say he
Title:  took women in the battle?
Title:  
Title:  He told no lie. The Yengeese have sent out their scouts. They have been in
Title:  my wigwams, but they found there no one to say welcome. Then they fled to
Title:  the Delawares - for, say they, the Delawares are our friends; their minds
Title:  are turned from their Canada father!
Title:  
Title:  This insinuation was a home thrust, and one that in a more advanced state of
Title:  society would have entitled Magua to the reputation of a skillful
Title:  diplomatist. The recent defection of the tribe had, as they well knew
Title:  themselves, subjected the Delawares to much reproach among their French
Title:  allies; and they were now made to feel that their future actions were to be
Title:  regarded with jealousy and distrust. There was no deep insight into causes
Title:  and effects necessary to foresee that such a situation of things was likely
Title:  to prove highly prejudicial to their future movements. Their distant
Title:  villages, their hunting-grounds and hundreds of their women and children,
Title:  together with a material part of their physical force, were actually within
Title:  the limits of the French territory. Accordingly, this alarming annunciation
Title:  was received, as Magua intended, with manifest disapprobation, if not with
Title:  alarm.
Title:  
Title:  Let my father look in my face, said Le Coeur-dur; he will see no change. It
Title:  is true, my young men did not go out on the war-path; they had dreams for
Title:  not doing so. But they love and venerate the great white chief.
Title:  
Title:  Will he think so when he hears that his greatest enemy is fed in the camp of
Title:  his children? When he is told a bloody Yengee smokes at your fire? That the
Title:  pale face who has slain so many of his friends goes in and out among the
Title:  Delawares? Go! my great Canada father is not a fool!
Title:  
Title:  Where is the Yengee that the Delawares fear? returned the other; who has
Title:  slain my young men? who is the mortal enemy of my Great Father?
Title:  
Title:  La Longue Carabine!
Title:  
Title:  The Delaware warriors started at the well-known name, betraying by their
Title:  amazement, that they now learned, for the first time, one so famous among
Title:  the Indian allies of France was within their power.
Title:  
Title:  What does my brother mean? demanded Le Coeur-dur, in a tone that, by its
Title:  wonder, far exceeded the usual apathy of his race.
Title:  
Title:  A Huron never lies! returned Magua, coldly, leaning his head against the
Title:  side of the lodge, and drawing his slight robe across his tawny breast. Let
Title:  the Delawares count their prisoners; they will find one whose skin is
Title:  neither red nor pale.
Title:  
Title:  A long and musing pause succeeded. The chief consulted apart with his
Title:  companions, and messengers despatched to collect certain others of the most
Title:  distinguished men of the tribe.
Title:  
Title:  As warrior after warrior dropped in, they were each made acquainted, in
Title:  turn, with the important intelligence that Magua had just communicated. The
Title:  air of surprise, and the usual low, deep, guttural exclamation, were common
Title:  to them all. The news spread from mouth to mouth, until the whole encampment
Title:  became powerfully agitated. The women suspended their labors, to catch such
Title:  syllables as unguardedly fell from the lips of the consulting warriors. The
Title:  boys deserted their sports, and walking fearlessly among their fathers,
Title:  looked up in curious admiration, as they heard the brief exclamations of
Title:  wonder they so freely expressed the temerity of their hated foe. In short,
Title:  every occupation was abandoned for the time, and all other pursuits seemed
Title:  discarded in order that the tribe might freely indulge, after their own
Title:  peculiar manner, in an open expression of feeling.
Title:  
Title:  When the excitement had a little abated, the old men disposed themselves
Title:  seriously to consider that which it became the honor and safety of their
Title:  tribe to perform, under circumstances of so much delicacy and embarrassment.
Title:  During all these movements, and in the midst of the general commotion, Magua
Title:  had not only maintained his seat, but the very attitude he had originally
Title:  taken, against the side of the lodge, where he continued as immovable, and,
Title:  apparently, as unconcerned, as if he had no interest in the result. Not a
Title:  single indication of the future intentions of his hosts, however, escaped
Title:  his vigilant eyes. With his consummate knowledge of the nature of the people
Title:  with whom he had to deal, he anticipated every measure on which they
Title:  decided; and it might almost be said, that, in many instances, he knew their
Title:  intentions, even before they became known to themselves.
Title:  
Title:  The council of the Delawares was short. When it was ended, a general bustle
Title:  announced that it was to be immediately succeeded by a solemn and formal
Title:  assemblage of the nation. As such meetings were rare, and only called on
Title:  occasions of the last importance, the subtle Huron, who still sat apart, a
Title:  wily and dark observer of the proceedings, now knew that all his projects
Title:  must be brought to their final issue. He, therefore, left the lodge and
Title:  walked silently forth to the place, in front of the encampment, whither the
Title:  warriors were already beginning to collect.
Title:  
Title:  It might have been half an hour before each individual, including even the
Title:  women and children, was in his place. The delay had been created by the
Title:  grave preparations that were deemed necessary to so solemn and unusual a
Title:  conference. But when the sun was seen climbing above the tops of that
Title:  mountain, against whose bosom the Delawares had constructed their
Title:  encampment, most were seated; and as his bright rays darted from behind the
Title:  outline of trees that fringed the eminence, they fell upon as grave, as
Title:  attentive, and as deeply interested a multitude, as was probably ever before
Title:  lighted by his morning beams. Its number somewhat exceeded a thousand souls.
Title:  
Title:  In a collection of so serious savages, there is never to be found any
Title:  impatient aspirant after premature distinction, standing ready to move his
Title:  auditors to some hasty, and, perhaps, injudicious discussion, in order that
Title:  his own reputation may be the gainer. An act of so much precipitancy and
Title:  presumption would seal the downfall of precocious intellect forever. It
Title:  rested solely with the oldest and most experienced of the men to lay the
Title:  subject of the conference before the people. Until such a one chose to make
Title:  some movement, no deeds in arms, no natural gifts, nor any renown as an
Title:  orator, would have justified the slightest interruption. On the present
Title:  occasion, the aged warrior whose privilege it was to speak, was silent,
Title:  seemingly oppressed with the magnitude of his subject. The delay had already
Title:  continued long beyond the usual deliberative pause that always preceded a
Title:  conference; but no sign of impatience or surprise escaped even the youngest
Title:  boy. Occasionally an eye was raised from the earth, where the looks of most
Title:  were riveted, and strayed toward a particular lodge, that was, however, in
Title:  no manner distinguished from those around it, except in the peculiar care
Title:  that had been taken to protect it against the assaults of the weather.
Title:  
Title:  At length one of those low murmurs, that are so apt to disturb a multitude,
Title:  was heard, and the whole nation arose to their feet by a common impulse. At
Title:  that instant the door of the lodge in question opened, and three men,
Title:  issuing from it, slowly approached the place of consultation. They were all
Title:  aged, even beyond that period to which the oldest present had reached; but
Title:  one in the center, who leaned on his companions for support, had numbered an
Title:  amount of years to which the human race is seldom permitted to attain. His
Title:  frame, which had once been tall and erect, like the cedar, was now bending
Title:  under the pressure of more than a century. The elastic, light step of an
Title:  Indian was gone, and in its place he was compelled to toil his tardy way
Title:  over the ground, inch by inch. His dark, wrinkled countenance was in
Title:  singular and wild contrast with the long white locks which floated on his
Title:  shoulders, in such thickness, as to announce that generations had probably
Title:  passed away since they had last been shorn.
Title:  
Title:  The dress of this patriarch - for such, considering his vast age, in
Title:  conjunction with his affinity and influence with his people, he might very
Title:  properly be termed - was rich and imposing, though strictly after the simple
Title:  fashions of the tribe. His robe was of the finest skins, which had been
Title:  deprived of their fur, in order to admit of a hieroglyphical representation
Title:  of various deeds in arms, done in former ages. His bosom was loaded with
Title:  medals, some in massive silver, and one or two even in gold, the gifts of
Title:  various Christian potentates during the long period of his life. He also
Title:  wore armlets, and cinctures above the ankles, of the latter precious metal.
Title:  His head, on the whole of which the hair had been permitted to grow, the
Title:  pursuits of war having so long been abandoned, was encircled by a sort of
Title:  plated diadem, which, in its turn, bore lesser and more glittering
Title:  ornaments, that sparkled amid the glossy hues of three drooping ostrich
Title:  feathers, dyed a deep black, in touching contrast to the color of his
Title:  snow-white locks. His tomahawk was nearly hid in silver, and the handle of
Title:  his knife shone like a horn of solid gold.
Title:  
Title:  So soon as the first hum of emotion and pleasure, which the sudden
Title:  appearance of this venerated individual created, had a little subsided, the
Title:  name of Tamenund was whispered from mouth to mouth. Magua had often heard
Title:  the fame of this wise and just Delaware; a reputation that even proceeded so
Title:  far as to bestow on him the rare gift of holding secret communion with the
Title:  Great Spirit, and which has since transmitted his name, with some slight
Title:  alteration, to the white usurpers of his ancient territory, as the imaginary
Title:  tutelar saint2 of a vast empire. The Huron chief, therefore, stepped eagerly
Title:  out a little from the throng, to a spot whence he might catch a nearer
Title:  glimpse of the features of the man, whose decision was likely to produce so
Title:  deep an influence on his own fortunes.
Title:  
Title:  The eyes of the old man were closed, as though the organs were wearied with
Title:  having so long witnessed the selfish workings of the human passions. The
Title:  color of his skin differed from that of most around him, being richer and
Title:  darker, the latter having been produced by certain delicate and mazy lines
Title:  of complicated and yet beautiful figures, which had been traced over most of
Title:  his person by the operation of tattooing. Notwithstanding the position of
Title:  the Huron, he passed the observant and silent Magua without notice, and
Title:  leaning on his two venerable supporters proceeded to the high place of the
Title:  multitude, where he seated himself in the center of his nation, with the
Title:  dignity of a monarch and the air of a father.
Title:  
Title:  Nothing could surpass the reverence and affection with which this unexpected
Title:  visit from one who belongs rather to another world than to this, was
Title:  received by his people. After a suitable and decent pause, the principal
Title:  chiefs arose, and, approaching the patriarch, they placed his hands
Title:  reverently on their heads, seeming to entreat a blessing. The younger men
Title:  were content with touching his robe, or even drawing nigh his person, in
Title:  order to breathe in the atmosphere of one so aged, so just, and so valiant.
Title:  None but the most distinguished among the youthful warriors even presumed to
Title:  far as to perform the latter ceremony, the great mass of the multitude
Title:  deeming it a sufficient happiness to look upon a form so deeply venerated,
Title:  and so well beloved. When these acts of affection and respect were
Title:  performed, the chiefs drew back again to their several places, and silence
Title:  reigned in the whole encampment.
Title:  
Title:  After a short delay, a few of the young men, to whom instructions had been
Title:  whispered by one of the aged attendants of Tamenund, arose, left the crowd,
Title:  and entered the lodge which has already been noted as the object of so much
Title:  attention throughout that morning. In a few minutes they reappeared,
Title:  escorting the individuals who had caused all these solemn preparations
Title:  toward the seat of judgment. The crowd opened in a lane; and when the party
Title:  had re-entered, it closed in again, forming a large and dense belt of human
Title:  bodies, arranged in an open circle.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 A dish composed of cracked corn and beans. It is much used also by the
Title:  whites. By corn is meant maize.
Title:  
Title:  2 The Americans sometimes called their tutelar saint Tamenay, a corruption
Title:  of the name of the renowned chief here introduced. There are many traditions
Title:  which speak of the character and power of Tamenund.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 29
Title:  
Title:       The assembly seated, rising o'er the rest,
Title:       Achilles thus the king of men addressed.
Title:  
Title:                                                            POPE'S Homer
Title:  
Title:  Cora stood foremost among the prisoners, entwining her arms in those of
Title:  Alice, in the tenderness of sisterly love. Notwithstanding the fearful and
Title:  menacing array of savages on every side of her, no apprehension on her own
Title:  account could prevent the nobler-minded maiden from keeping her eyes
Title:  fastened on the pale and anxious features of the trembling Alice. Close at
Title:  their side stood Heyward, with an interest in both, that, at such a moment
Title:  of intense uncertainty, scarcely knew a preponderance in favor of her whom
Title:  he most loved. Hawkeye had placed himself a little in the rear, with a
Title:  deference to the superior rank of his companions, that no similarity in the
Title:  state of their present fortunes could induce him to forget. Uncas was not
Title:  there.
Title:  
Title:  When perfect silence was again restored, and after the usual long,
Title:  impressive pause, one of the two aged chiefs who sat at the side of the
Title:  patriarch arose, and demanded aloud, in very intelligible English:
Title:  
Title:  Which of my prisoners is La Longue Carabine?
Title:  
Title:  Neither Duncan nor the scout answered. The former, however, glanced his eyes
Title:  around the dark and silent assembly, and recoiled a pace, when they fell on
Title:  the malignant visage of Magua. He saw, at once, that this wily savage had
Title:  some secret agency in their present arraignment before the nation, and
Title:  determined to throw every possible impediment in the way of the execution of
Title:  his sinister plans. He had witnessed one instance of the summary punishments
Title:  of the Indians, and now dreaded that his companion was to be selected for a
Title:  second. In this dilemma, with little or no time for reflection, he suddenly
Title:  determined to cloak his invaluable friend, at any or every hazard to
Title:  himself. Before he had time, however, to speak, the question was repeated in
Title:  a louder voice, and with a clearer utterance.
Title:  
Title:  Give us arms, the young man haughtily replied, and place us in yonder woods.
Title:  Our deeds shall speak for us!
Title:  
Title:  This is the warrior whose name has filled our ears! returned the chief,
Title:  regarding Heyward with that sort of curious interest which seems inseparable
Title:  from man, when first beholding one of his fellows to whom merit or accident,
Title:  virtue or crime, has given notoriety. What has brought the white man into
Title:  the camp of the Delawares?
Title:  
Title:  My necessities. I come for food, shelter, and friends.
Title:  
Title:  It cannot be. The woods are full of game. The head of a warrior needs no
Title:  other shelter than a sky without clouds; and the Delawares are the enemies,
Title:  and not the friends of the Yengeese. Go, the mouth has spoken, while the
Title:  heart said nothing.
Title:  
Title:  Duncan, a little at a loss in what manner to proceed, remained silent; but
Title:  the scout, who had listened attentively to all that passed, now advanced
Title:  steadily to the front.
Title:  
Title:  That I did not answer to the call for La Longue Carabine, was not owing
Title:  either to shame or fear, he said, for neither one nor the other is the gift
Title:  of an honest man. But I do not admit the right of the Mingoes to bestow a
Title:  name on one whose friends have been mindful of his gifts, in this
Title:  particular; especially as their title is a lie, killdeer being a grooved
Title:  barrel and no carabyne. I am the man, however, that got the name of
Title:  Nathaniel from my kin; the compliment of Hawkeye from the Delawares, who
Title:  live on their own river; and whom the Iroquois have presumed to style the
Title:  Long Rifle, without any warranty from him who is most concerned in the
Title:  matter.
Title:  
Title:  The eyes of all present, which had hitherto been gravely scanning the person
Title:  of Duncan, were now turned, on the instant, toward the upright iron frame of
Title:  this new pretender to the distinguished appellation. It was in no degree
Title:  remarkable that there should be found two who were willing to claim so great
Title:  an honor, for imposters, though rare, were not unknown among the natives;
Title:  but it was altogether material to the just and severe intentions of the
Title:  Delawares, that there should be no mistake in the matter. Some of their old
Title:  men consulted together in private, and then, as it would seem, they
Title:  determined to interrogate their visitor on the subject.
Title:  
Title:  My brother has said that a snake crept into my camp, said the chief to
Title:  Magua; which is he?
Title:  
Title:  The Huron pointed to the scout.
Title:  
Title:  Will a wise Delaware believe the barking of a wolf? exclaimed Duncan, still
Title:  more confirmed in the evil intentions of his ancient enemy: a dog never
Title:  lies, but when was a wolf known to speak the truth?
Title:  
Title:  The eyes of Magua flashed fire; but suddenly recollecting the necessity of
Title:  maintaining his presence of mind, he turned away in silent disdain, well
Title:  assured that the sagacity of the Indians would not fail to extract the real
Title:  merits of the point in controversy. He was not deceived; for, after another
Title:  short consultation, the wary Delaware turned to him again, and expressed the
Title:  determination of the chiefs, though in the most considerate language.
Title:  
Title:  My brother has been called a liar, he said, and his friends are angry. They
Title:  will show that he has spoken the truth. Give my prisoners guns, and let them
Title:  prove which is the man.
Title:  
Title:  Magua affected to consider the expedient, which he well knew proceeded from
Title:  distrust of himself, as a compliment, and made a gesture of acquiescence,
Title:  well content that his veracity should be supported by so skillful a marksman
Title:  as the scout. The weapons were instantly placed in the hands of the friendly
Title:  opponents, and they were bid to fire, over the heads of the seated
Title:  multitude, at an earthen vessel, which lay, by accident, on a stump, some
Title:  fifty yards from the place where they stood.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward smiled to himself at the idea of a competition with the scout,
Title:  though he determined to persevere in the deception, until apprised of the
Title:  real designs of Magua.
Title:  
Title:  Raising his rifle with the utmost care, and renewing his aim three several
Title:  times, he fired. The bullet cut the wood within a few inches of the vessel;
Title:  and a general exclamation of satisfaction announced that the shot was
Title:  considered a proof of great skill in the use of a weapon. Even Hawkeye
Title:  nodded his head, as if he would say, it was better than he expected. But,
Title:  instead of manifesting an intention to contend with the successful marksman,
Title:  he stood leaning on his rifle for more than a minute, like a man who was
Title:  completely buried in thought. From this reverie, he was, however, awakened
Title:  by one of the young Indians who had furnished the arms, and who now touched
Title:  his shoulder, saying in exceedingly broken English:
Title:  
Title:  Can the pale face beat it?
Title:  
Title:  Yes, Huron! exclaimed the scout, raising the short rifle in his right hand,
Title:  and shaking it at Magua, with as much apparent ease as if it were a reed;
Title:  yes, Huron, I could strike you now, and no power on earth could prevent the
Title:  deed! The soaring hawk is not more certain of the dove than I am this moment
Title:  of you, did I choose to send a bullet to your heart! Why should I not? Why!
Title:  - because the gifts of my color forbid it, and I might draw down evil on
Title:  tender and innocent heads. If you know such a being as God, thank Him,
Title:  therefore, in your inward soul; for you have reason!
Title:  
Title:  The flushed countenance, angry eye and swelling figure of the scout,
Title:  produced a sensation of secret awe in all that heard him. The Delawares held
Title:  their breath in expectation; but Magua himself, even while he distrusted the
Title:  forbearance of his enemy, remained immovable and calm, where he stood wedged
Title:  in by the crowd, as one who grew to the spot.
Title:  
Title:  Beat it, repeated the young Delaware at the elbow of the scout.
Title:  
Title:  Beat what, fool! - what? exclaimed Hawkeye, still flourishing the weapon
Title:  angrily above his head, though his eye no longer sought the person of Magua.
Title:  
Title:  If the white man is the warrior he pretends, said the aged chief, let him
Title:  strike nigher to the mark.
Title:  
Title:  The scout laughed aloud - a noise that produced the startling effect of an
Title:  unnatural sound on Heyward; then dropping the piece, heavily, into his
Title:  extended left hand, it was discharged, apparently by the shock, driving the
Title:  fragments of the vessel into the air, and scattering them on every side.
Title:  Almost at the same instant, the rattling sound of the rifle was heard, as he
Title:  suffered it to fall, contemptuously, to the earth.
Title:  
Title:  The first impression of so strange a scene was engrossing admiration. Then a
Title:  low, but increasing murmur, ran through the multitude, and finally swelled
Title:  into sounds that denoted a lively opposition in the sentiments of the
Title:  spectators. While some openly testified their satisfaction at so unexampled
Title:  dexterity, by far the larger portion of the tribe were inclined to believe
Title:  the success of the shot was the result of accident. Heyward was not slow to
Title:  confirm an opinion that was so favorable to his own pretensions.
Title:  
Title:  It was chance! he exclaimed; none can shoot without an aim!
Title:  
Title:  Chance! echoed the excited woodsman, who was now stubbornly bent on
Title:  maintaining his identity at every hazard, and on whom the secret hints of
Title:  Heyward to acquiesce in the deception were entirely lost. Does yonder lying
Title:  Huron, too, think it chance? Give him another gun, and place us face to
Title:  face, without cover or dodge, and let Providence, and our own eyes, decide
Title:  the matter atween us! I do not make the offer, to you, major; for our blood
Title:  is of a color, and we serve the same master.
Title:  
Title:  That the Huron is a liar, is very evident, returned Heyward, coolly; you
Title:  have yourself heard him asset you to be La Longue Carabine.
Title:  
Title:  It were impossible to say what violent assertion the stubborn Hawkeye would
Title:  have next made, in his headlong wish to vindicate his identity, had not the
Title:  aged Delaware once more interposed.
Title:  
Title:  The hawk which comes from the clouds can return when he will, he said; give
Title:  them the guns.
Title:  
Title:  This time the scout seized the rifle with avidity; nor had Magua, though he
Title:  watched the movements of the marksman with jealous eyes, any further cause
Title:  for apprehension.
Title:  
Title:  Now let it be proved, in the face of this tribe of Delawares, which is the
Title:  better man, cried the scout, tapping the butt of his piece with that finger
Title:  which had pulled so many fatal triggers.
Title:  
Title:  You see that gourd hanging against yonder tree, major; if you are a marksman
Title:  fit for the borders, let me see you break its shell!
Title:  
Title:  Duncan noted the object, and prepared himself to renew the trial. The gourd
Title:  was one of the usual little vessels used by the Indians, and it was
Title:  suspended from a dead branch of a small pine, by a thong of deerskin, at the
Title:  full distance of a hundred yards. So strangely compounded is the feeling of
Title:  self-love, that the young soldier, while he knew the utter worthlessness of
Title:  the suffrages of his savage umpires, forgot the sudden motives of the
Title:  contest in a wish to excel. It had been seen, already, that his skill was
Title:  far from being contemptible, and he now resolved to put forth its nicest
Title:  qualities. Had his life depended on the issue, the aim of Duncan could not
Title:  have been more deliberate or guarded. He fired; and three or four young
Title:  Indians, who sprang forward at the report, announced with a shout, that the
Title:  ball was in the tree, a very little on one side of the proper object. The
Title:  warriors uttered a common ejaculation of pleasure, and then turned their
Title:  eyes, inquiringly, on the movements of his rival.
Title:  
Title:  It may do for the Royal Americans! said Hawkeye, laughing once more in his
Title:  own silent, heartfelt manner; but had my gun often turned so much from the
Title:  true line, many a marten, whose skin is now in a lady's muff, would still be
Title:  in the woods; ay, and many a bloody Mingo, who has departed to his final
Title:  account, would be acting his deviltries at this very day, atween the
Title:  provinces. I hope the squaw who owns the gourd has more of them in her
Title:  wigwam, for this will never hold water again!
Title:  
Title:  The scout had shook his priming, and cocked his piece, while speaking; and,
Title:  as he ended, he threw back a foot, and slowly raised the muzzle from the
Title:  earth: the motion was steady, uniform, and in one direction. When on a
Title:  perfect level, it remained for a single moment, without tremor or variation,
Title:  as though both man and rifle were carved in stone. During that stationary
Title:  instant, it poured forth its contents, in a bright, glancing sheet of flame.
Title:  Again the young Indians bounded forward; but their hurried search and
Title:  disappointed looks announced that no traces of the bullet were to be seen.
Title:  
Title:  Go! said the old chief to the scout, in a tone of strong disgust; thou art a
Title:  wolf in the skin of a dog. I will talk to the Long Rifle of the Yengeese.
Title:  
Title:  Ah! had I that piece which furnished the name you use, I would obligate
Title:  myself to cut the thong, and drop the gourd without breaking it! returned
Title:  Hawkeye, perfectly undisturbed by the other's manner. Fools, if you would
Title:  find the bullet of a sharpshooter in these woods, you must look in the
Title:  object, and not around it!
Title:  
Title:  The Indian youths instantly comprehended his meaning - for this time he
Title:  spoke in the Delaware tongue - and tearing the gourd from the tree, they
Title:  held it on high with an exulting shout, displaying a hole in its bottom,
Title:  which had been but by the bullet, after passing through the usual orifice in
Title:  the center of its upper side. At this unexpected exhibition, a loud and
Title:  vehement expression of pleasure burst from the mouth of every warrior
Title:  present. It decided the question, and effectually established Hawkeye in the
Title:  possession of his dangerous reputation. Those curious and admiring eyes
Title:  which had been turned again on Heyward, were finally directed to the
Title:  weather-beaten form of the scout, who immediately became the principal
Title:  object of attention to the simple and unsophisticated beings by whom he was
Title:  surrounded. When the sudden and noisy commotion had a little subsided, the
Title:  aged chief resumed his examination.
Title:  
Title:  Why did you wish to stop my ears? he said, addressing Duncan; are the
Title:  Delawares fools that they could not know the young panther from the cat?
Title:  
Title:  They will yet find the Huron a singing-bird, said Duncan, endeavoring to
Title:  adopt the figurative language of the natives.
Title:  
Title:  It is good. We will know who can shut the ears of men. Brother, added the
Title:  chief turning his eyes on Magua, the Delawares listen.
Title:  
Title:  Thus singled, and directly called on to declare his object, the Huron arose;
Title:  and advancing with great deliberation and dignity into the very center of
Title:  the circle, where he stood confronted by the prisoners, he placed himself in
Title:  an attitude to speak. Before opening his mouth, however, he bent his eyes
Title:  slowly along the whole living boundary of earnest faces, as if to temper his
Title:  expressions to the capacities of his audience. On Hawkeye he cast a glance
Title:  of respectful enmity; on Duncan, a look of inextinguishable hatred; the
Title:  shrinking figure of Alice he scarcely deigned to notice; but when his glance
Title:  met the firm, commanding, and yet lovely form of Cora, his eye lingered a
Title:  moment, with an expression that it might have been difficult to define.
Title:  Then, filled with his own dark intentions, he spoke in the language of the
Title:  Canadas, a tongue that he well knew was comprehended by most of his
Title:  auditors.
Title:  
Title:  The Spirit that made men colored them differently, commenced the subtle
Title:  Huron. Some are blacker than the sluggish bear. These He said should be
Title:  slaves; and He ordered them to work forever, like the beaver. You may hear
Title:  them groan, when the south wind blows, louder than the lowing buffaloes,
Title:  along the shores of the great salt lake, where the big canoes come and go
Title:  with them in droves. Some He made with faces paler than the ermine of the
Title:  forests; and these He ordered to be traders; dogs to their women, and wolves
Title:  to their slaves. He gave this people the nature of the pigeon; wings that
Title:  never tire; young, more plentiful than the leaves on the trees, and
Title:  appetites to devour the earth. He gave them tongues like the false call of
Title:  the wildcat; hearts like rabbits; the cunning of the hog (but none of the
Title:  fox), and arms longer than the legs of the moose. With his tongue he stops
Title:  the ears of the Indians; his heart teaches him to pay warriors to fight his
Title:  battles; his cunning tells him how to get together the goods of the earth;
Title:  and his arms inclose the land from the shores of the salt-water to the
Title:  islands of the great lake. His gluttony makes him sick. God gave him enough,
Title:  and yet he wants all. Such are the pale faces.
Title:  
Title:  Some the Great Spirit made with skins brighter and redder than yonder sun,
Title:  continued Magua, pointing impressively upward to the lurid luminary, which
Title:  was struggling through the misty atmosphere of the horizon; and these did He
Title:  fashion to His own mind. He gave them this island as He had made it, covered
Title:  with trees, and filled with game. The wind made their clearings; the sun and
Title:  rain ripened their fruits; and the snows came to tell them to be thankful.
Title:  What need had they of roads to journey by! They saw through the hills! When
Title:  the beavers worked, they lay in the shade, and looked on. The winds cooled
Title:  them in summer; in winter, skins kept them warm. If they fought among
Title:  themselves, it was to prove that they were men. They were brave; they were
Title:  just; they were happy.
Title:  
Title:  Here the speaker paused, and again looked around him to discover if his
Title:  legend had touched the sympathies of his listeners. He met everywhere, with
Title:  eyes riveted on his own, heads erect and nostrils expanded, as if each
Title:  individual present felt himself able and willing, singly, to redress the
Title:  wrongs of his race.
Title:  
Title:  If the Great Spirit gave different tongues to his red children, he
Title:  continued, in a low, still melancholy voice, it was that all animals might
Title:  understand them. Some He placed among the snows, with their cousin, the
Title:  bear. Some he placed near the setting sun, on the road to the happy hunting
Title:  grounds. Some on the lands around the great fresh waters; but to His
Title:  greatest, and most beloved, He gave the sands of the salt lake. Do my
Title:  brothers know the name of this favored people?
Title:  
Title:  It was the Lenape! exclaimed twenty eager voices in a breath.
Title:  
Title:  It was the Lenni Lenape, returned Magua, affecting to bend his head in
Title:  reverence to their former greatness. It was the tribes of the Lenape! The
Title:  sun rose from water that was salt, and set in water that was sweet, and
Title:  never hid himself from their eyes. But why should I, a Huron of the woods,
Title:  tell a wise people their own traditions? Why remind them of their injuries;
Title:  their ancient greatness; their deeds; their glory; their happiness; their
Title:  losses; their defeats; their misery? Is there not one among them who has
Title:  seen it all, and who knows it to be true? I have done. My tongue is still
Title:  for my heart is of lead. I listen.
Title:  
Title:  As the voice of the speaker suddenly ceased, every face and all eyes turned,
Title:  by a common movement, toward the venerable Tamenund. From the moment that he
Title:  took his seat, until the present instant, the lips of the patriarch had not
Title:  severed, and scarcely a sign of life had escaped him. He sat bent in
Title:  feebleness, and apparently unconscious of the presence he was in, during the
Title:  whole of that opening scene, in which the skill of the scout had been so
Title:  clearly established. At the nicely graduated sound of Magua's voice,
Title:  however, he betrayed some evidence of consciousness, and once or twice he
Title:  even raised his head, as if to listen. But when the crafty Huron spoke of
Title:  his nation by name, the eyelids of the old man raised themselves, and he
Title:  looked out upon the multitude with that sort of dull, unmeaning expression
Title:  which might be supposed to belong to the countenance of a specter. Then he
Title:  made an effort to rise, and being upheld by his supporters, he gained his
Title:  feet, in a posture commanding by its dignity, while he tottered with
Title:  weakness.
Title:  
Title:  Who calls upon the children of the Lenape? he said, in a deep, guttural
Title:  voice, that was rendered awfully audible by the breathless silence of the
Title:  multitude; who speaks of things gone? Does not the egg become a worm - the
Title:  worm a fly, and perish? Why tell the Delawares of good that is past? Better
Title:  thank the Manitou for that which remains.
Title:  
Title:  It is a Wyandot, said Magua, stepping nigher to the rude platform on which
Title:  the other stood; a friend of Tamenund.
Title:  
Title:  A friend! repeated the sage, on whose brow a dark frown settled, imparting a
Title:  portion of that severity which had rendered his eye so terrible in middle
Title:  age. Are the Mingoes rulers of the earth? What brings a Huron in here?
Title:  
Title:  Justice. His prisoners are with his brothers, and he comes for his own.
Title:  
Title:  Tamenund turned his head toward one of his supporters, and listened to the
Title:  short explanation the man gave.
Title:  
Title:  Then, facing the applicant, he regarded him a moment with deep attention;
Title:  after which he said, in a low and reluctant voice:
Title:  
Title:  Justice is the law of the great Manitou. My children, give the stranger
Title:  food. Then, Huron, take thine own and depart.
Title:  
Title:  On the delivery of this solemn judgment, the patriarch seated himself, and
Title:  closed his eyes again, as if better pleased with the images of his own
Title:  ripened experience than with the visible objects of the world. Against such
Title:  a decree there was no Delaware sufficiently hardy to murmur, much less
Title:  oppose himself. The words were barely uttered when four or five of the
Title:  younger warriors, stepping behind Heyward and the scout, passed thongs so
Title:  dexterously and rapidly around their arms, as to hold them both in instant
Title:  bondage. The former was too much engrossed with his precious and nearly
Title:  insensible burden, to be aware of their intentions before they were
Title:  executed; and the latter, who considered even the hostile tribes of the
Title:  Delawares a superior race of beings, submitted without resistance. Perhaps,
Title:  however, the manner of the scout would not have been so passive, had he
Title:  fully comprehended the language in which the preceding dialogue had been
Title:  conducted.
Title:  
Title:  Magua cast a look of triumph around the whole assembly before he proceeded
Title:  to the execution of his purpose. Perceiving that the men were unable to
Title:  offer any resistance, he turned his looks on her he valued most. Cora met
Title:  his gaze with an eye so calm and firm, that his resolution wavered. Then,
Title:  recollecting his former artifice, he raised Alice from the arms of the
Title:  warrior against whom she leaned, and beckoning Heyward to follow, he
Title:  motioned for the encircling crowd to open. But Cora, instead of obeying the
Title:  impulse he had expected, rushed to the feet of the patriarch, and, raising
Title:  her voice, exclaimed aloud:
Title:  
Title:  Just and venerable Delaware, on thy wisdom and power we lean for mercy! Be
Title:  deaf to yonder artful and remorseless monster, who poisons thy ears with
Title:  falsehoods to feed his thirst for blood. Thou that hast lived long, and that
Title:  hast seen the evil of the world, should know how to temper its calamities to
Title:  the miserable.
Title:  
Title:  The eyes of the old man opened heavily, and he once more looked upward at
Title:  the multitude. As the piercing tones of the suppliant swelled on his ears,
Title:  they moved slowly in the direction of her person, and finally settled there
Title:  in a steady gaze. Cora had cast herself to her knees; and, with hands
Title:  clenched in each other and pressed upon her bosom, she remained like a
Title:  beauteous and breathing model of her sex, looking up in his faded but
Title:  majestic countenance, with a species of holy reverence. Gradually the
Title:  expression of Tamenund's features changed, and losing their vacancy in
Title:  admiration, they lighted with a portion of that intelligence which a century
Title:  before had been wont to communicate his youthful fire to the extensive bands
Title:  of the Delawares. Rising without assistance, and seemingly without an
Title:  effort, he demanded, in a voice that startled its auditors by its firmness:
Title:  
Title:  What art thou?
Title:  
Title:  A woman. One of a hated race, it thou wilt - a Yengee. But one who has never
Title:  harmed thee, and who cannot harm thy people, if she would; who asks for
Title:  succor.
Title:  
Title:  Tell me, my children, continued the patriarch, hoarsely, motioning to those
Title:  around him, though his eyes still dwelt upon the kneeling form of Cora,
Title:  where have the Delawares camped?
Title:  
Title:  In the mountains of the Iroquois, beyond the clear springs of the Horican.
Title:  
Title:  Many parching summers are come and gone, continued the sage, since I drank
Title:  of the water of my own rivers. The children of Minquon1 are the justest
Title:  white men, but they were thirsty and they took it to themselves. Do they
Title:  follow us so far?
Title:  
Title:  We follow none, we covet nothing, answered Cora. Captives against our wills,
Title:  have we been brought amongst you; and we ask but permission to depart to our
Title:  own in peace. Art thou not Tamenund - the father, the judge, I had almost
Title:  said, the prophet - of this people?
Title:  
Title:  I am Tamenund of many days.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis now some seven years that one of thy people was at the mercy of a white
Title:  chief on the borders of this province. He claimed to be of the blood of the
Title:  good and just Tamenund. Go, said the white man, for thy parent's sake thou
Title:  art free. Dost thou remember the name of that English warrior?
Title:  
Title:  I remember, that when a laughing boy, returned the patriarch, with the
Title:  peculiar recollection of vast age, I stood upon the sands of the sea shore,
Title:  and saw a big canoe, with wings whiter than the swan's, and wider than many
Title:  eagles, come from the rising sun.
Title:  
Title:  Nay, nay; I speak not of a time so very distant, but of favor shown to thy
Title:  kindred by one of mine, within the memory of thy youngest warrior.
Title:  
Title:  Was it when the Yengeese and the Dutchmanne fought for the hunting-grounds
Title:  of the Delawares? Then Tamenund was a chief, and first laid aside the bow
Title:  for the lightning of the pale faces - -
Title:  
Title:  Not yet then, interrupted Cora, by many ages; I speak of a thing of
Title:  yesterday. Surely, surely, you forget it not.
Title:  
Title:  It was but yesterday, rejoined the aged man, with touching pathos, that the
Title:  children of the Lenape were masters of the world. The fishes of the salt
Title:  lake, the birds, the beasts, and the Mengee of the woods, owned them for
Title:  Sagamores.
Title:  
Title:  Cora bowed her head in disappointment, and, for a bitter moment struggled
Title:  with her chagrin. Then, elevating her rich features and beaming eyes, she
Title:  continued, in tones scarcely less penetrating than the unearthly voice of
Title:  the patriarch himself:
Title:  
Title:  Tell me, is Tamenund a father?
Title:  
Title:  The old man looked down upon her from his elevated stand, with a benignant
Title:  smile on his wasted countenance, and then casting his eyes slowly over the
Title:  whole assemblage, he answered:
Title:  
Title:  Of a nation.
Title:  
Title:  For myself I ask nothing. Like thee and thine, venerable chief, she
Title:  continued, pressing her hands convulsively on her heart, and suffering her
Title:  head to droop until her burning cheeks were nearly concealed in the maze of
Title:  dark, glossy tresses that fell in disorder upon her shoulders, the curse of
Title:  my ancestors has fallen heavily on their child. But yonder is one who has
Title:  never known the weight of Heaven's displeasure until now. She is the
Title:  daughter of an old and failing man, whose days are near their close. She has
Title:  many, very many, to love her, and delight in her; and she is too good, much
Title:  too precious, to become the victim of that villain.
Title:  
Title:  I know that the pale faces are a proud and hungry race. I know that they
Title:  claim not only to have the earth, but that the meanest of their color is
Title:  better than the Sachems of the red man. The dogs and crows of their tribes,
Title:  continued the earnest old chieftain, without heeding the wounded spirit of
Title:  his listener, whose head was nearly crushed to the earth in shame, as he
Title:  proceeded, would bark and caw before they would take a woman to their
Title:  wigwams whose blood was not of the color of snow. But let them not boast
Title:  before the face of the Manitou too loud. They entered the land at the
Title:  rising, and may yet go off at the setting sun. I have often seen the locusts
Title:  strip the leaves from the trees, but the season of blossoms has always come
Title:  again.
Title:  
Title:  It is so, said Cora, drawing a long breath, as if reviving from a trance,
Title:  raising her face, and shaking back her shining veil, with a kindling eye,
Title:  that contradicted the death-like paleness of her countenance; but why - it
Title:  is not permitted us to inquire. There is yet one of thine own people who has
Title:  not been brought before thee; before thou lettest the Huron depart in
Title:  triumph, hear him speak.
Title:  
Title:  Observing Tamenund to look about him doubtingly, one of his companions said:
Title:  
Title:  It is a snake - a red-skin in the pay of the Yengeese. We keep him for the
Title:  torture.
Title:  
Title:  Let him come, returned the sage.
Title:  
Title:  Then Tamenund once more sank into his seat, and a silence so deep prevailed
Title:  while the young man prepared to obey his simple mandate, that the leaves,
Title:  which fluttered in the draught of the light morning air, were distinctly
Title:  heard rustling in the surrounding forest.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 William Penn was termed Minquon by the Delawares, and, as he never used
Title:  violence or injustice in his dealings with them, his reputation for probity
Title:  passed into a proverb. The American is justly proud of the origin of his
Title:  nation, which is perhaps unequaled in the history of the world; but the
Title:  Pennsylvanian and Jerseyman have more reason to value themselves in their
Title:  ancestors than the natives of any other state, since no wrong was done the
Title:  original owners of the soil.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 30
Title:  
Title:       Shylock: If you deny me, fie upon your law!
Title:       There is no force in the decrees of Venice:
Title:       I stand for judgment: answer, shall I have it?
Title:  
Title:                                                      MERCHANT OF VENICE
Title:  
Title:  The silence continued unbroken by human sounds for many anxious minutes.
Title:  Then the waving multitude opened and shut again, and Uncas stood in the
Title:  living circle. All those eyes, which had been curiously studying the
Title:  lineaments of the sage, as the source of their own intelligence, turned on
Title:  the instant, and were now bent in secret admiration on the erect, agile, and
Title:  faultless person of the captive. But neither the presence in which he found
Title:  himself, nor the exclusive attention that he attracted, in any manner
Title:  disturbed the self-possession of the young Mohican. He cast a deliberate and
Title:  observing look on every side of him, meeting the settled expression of
Title:  hostility that lowered in the visages of the chiefs with the same calmness
Title:  as the curious gaze of the attentive children. But when, last in this
Title:  haughty scrutiny, the person of Tamenund came under his glance, his eye
Title:  became fixed, as though all other objects were already forgotten. Then,
Title:  advancing with a slow and noiseless step up the area, he placed himself
Title:  immediately before the footstool of the sage. Here he stood unnoted, though
Title:  keenly observant himself, until one of the chiefs apprised the latter of his
Title:  presence.
Title:  
Title:  With what tongue does the prisoner speak to the Manitou? demanded the
Title:  patriarch, without unclosing his eyes.
Title:  
Title:  Like his fathers, Uncas replied; with the tongue of a Delaware.
Title:  
Title:  At this sudden and unexpected annunciation, a low, fierce yell ran through
Title:  the multitude, that might not inaptly be compared to the growl of the lion,
Title:  as his choler is first awakened - a fearful omen of the weight of his future
Title:  anger. The effect was equally strong on the sage, though differently
Title:  exhibited. He passed a hand before his eyes, as if to exclude the least
Title:  evidence of so shameful a spectacle, while he repeated, in his low, guttural
Title:  tones, the words he had just heard.
Title:  
Title:  A Delaware! I have lived to see the tribes of the Lenape driven from their
Title:  council-fires, and scattered, like broken herds of deer, among the hills of
Title:  the Iroquois! I have seen the hatchets of a strong people sweep woods from
Title:  the valleys, that the winds of heaven have spared! The beasts that run on
Title:  the mountains, and the birds that fly above the trees, have I seen living in
Title:  the wigwams of men; but never before have I found a Delaware so base as to
Title:  creep, like a poisonous serpent, into the camps of his nation.
Title:  
Title:  The singing-birds have opened their bills, returned Uncas, in the softest
Title:  notes of his own musical voice; and Tamenund has heard their song.
Title:  
Title:  The sage started, and bent his head aside, as if to catch the fleeting
Title:  sounds of some passing melody.
Title:  
Title:  Does Tamenund dream! he exclaimed. What voice is at his ear! Have the
Title:  winters gone backward! Will summer come again to the children of the Lenape!
Title:  
Title:  A solemn and respectful silence succeeded this incoherent burst from the
Title:  lips of the Delaware prophet. His people readily constructed his
Title:  unintelligible language into one of those mysterious conferences he was
Title:  believed to hold so frequently with a superior intelligence and they awaited
Title:  the issue of the revelation in awe. After a patient pause, however, one of
Title:  the aged men, perceiving that the sage had lost the recollection of the
Title:  subject before them, ventured to remind him again of the presence of the
Title:  prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  The false Delaware trembles lest he should hear the words of Tamenund, he
Title:  said. 'Tis a hound that howls, when the Yengeese show him a trail.
Title:  
Title:  And ye, returned Uncas, looking sternly around him, are dogs that whine,
Title:  when the Frenchman casts ye the offals of his deer!
Title:  
Title:  Twenty knives gleamed in the air, and as many warriors sprang to their feet,
Title:  at this biting, and perhaps merited retort; but a motion from one of the
Title:  chiefs suppressed the outbreaking of their tempers, and restored the
Title:  appearance of quiet. The task might probably have been more difficult, had
Title:  not a movement made by Tamenund indicated that he was again about to speak.
Title:  
Title:  Delaware! resumed the sage, little art thou worthy of thy name. My people
Title:  have not seen a bright sun in many winters; and the warrior who deserts his
Title:  tribe when hid in clouds is doubly a traitor. The law of the Manitou is
Title:  just. It is so; while the rivers run and the mountains stand, while the
Title:  blossoms come and go on the trees, it must be so. He is thine, my children;
Title:  deal justly by him.
Title:  
Title:  Not a limb was moved, nor was a breath drawn louder and longer than common,
Title:  until the closing syllable of this final decree had passed the lips of
Title:  Tamenund. Then a cry of vengeance burst at once, as it might be, from the
Title:  united lips of the nation; a frightful augury of their ruthless intentions.
Title:  In the midst of these prolonged and savage yells, a chief proclaimed, in a
Title:  high voice, that the captive was condemned to endure the dreadful trial of
Title:  torture by fire. The circle broke its order, and screams of delight mingled
Title:  with the bustle and tumult of preparation. Heyward struggled madly with his
Title:  captors; the anxious eye of Hawkeye began to look around him, with an
Title:  expression of peculiar earnestness; and Cora again threw herself at the feet
Title:  of the patriarch, once more a suppliant for mercy.
Title:  
Title:  Throughout the whole of these trying moments, Uncas had alone preserved his
Title:  serenity. He looked on the preparations with a steady eye, and when the
Title:  tormentors came to seize him, he met them with a firm and upright attitude.
Title:  One among them, if possible more fierce and savage than his fellows, seized
Title:  the hunting-shirt of the young warrior, and at a single effort tore it from
Title:  his body. Then, with a yell of frantic pleasure, he leaped toward his
Title:  unresisting victim and prepared to lead him to the stake. But, at that
Title:  moment, when he appeared most a stranger to the feelings of humanity, the
Title:  purpose of the savage was arrested as suddenly as if a supernatural agency
Title:  had interposed in the behalf of Uncas. The eyeballs of the Delaware seemed
Title:  to start from their sockets; his mouth opened and his whole form became
Title:  frozen in an attitude of amazement. Raising his hand with a slow and
Title:  regulated motion, he pointed with a finger to the bosom of the captive. His
Title:  companions crowded about him in wonder and every eye was like his own,
Title:  fastened intently on the figure of a small tortoise, beautifully tattooed on
Title:  the breast of the prisoner, in a bright blue tint.
Title:  
Title:  For a single instant Uncas enjoyed his triumph, smiling calmly on the scene.
Title:  Then motioning the crowd away with a high and haughty sweep of his arm, he
Title:  advanced in front of the nation with the air of a king, and spoke in a voice
Title:  louder than the murmur of admiration that ran through the multitude.
Title:  
Title:  Men of the Lenni Lenape! he said, my race upholds the earth! Your feeble
Title:  tribe stands on my shell! What fire that a Delaware can light would burn the
Title:  child of my fathers, he added, pointing proudly to the simple blazonry on
Title:  his skin; the blood that came from such a stock would smother your flames!
Title:  My race is the grandfather of nations!
Title:  
Title:  Who art thou? demanded Tamenund, rising at the startling tones he heard,
Title:  more than at any meaning conveyed by the language of the prisoner.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas, the son of Chingachgook, answered the captive modestly, turning from
Title:  the nation, and bending his head in reverence to the other's character and
Title:  years; a son of the great Unamis.1 The hour of Tamenund is nigh! exclaimed
Title:  the sage; the day is come, at last, to the night! I thank the Manitou, that
Title:  one is here to fill my place at the council-fire. Uncas, the child of Uncas,
Title:  is found! Let the eyes of a dying eagle gaze on the rising sun.
Title:  
Title:  The youth stepped lightly, but proudly on the platform, where he became
Title:  visible to the whole agitated and wondering multitude. Tamenund held him
Title:  long at the length of his arm and read every turn in the fine lineaments of
Title:  his countenance, with the untiring gaze of one who recalled days of
Title:  happiness.
Title:  
Title:  Is Tamenund a boy? at length the bewildered prophet exclaimed. Have I
Title:  dreamed of so many snows - that my people were scattered like floating sands
Title:  - of Yengeese, more plenty than the leaves on the trees! The arrow of
Title:  Tamenund would not frighten the fawn; his arm if withered like the branch of
Title:  a dead oak; the snail would be swifter in the race; yet is Uncas before him
Title:  as they went to battle against the pale faces! Uncas, the panther of his
Title:  tribe, the eldest son of the Lenape, the wisest Sagamore of the Mohicans!
Title:  Tell me, ye Delawares has Tamenund been a sleeper for a hundred winters?
Title:  
Title:  The calm and deep silence which succeeded these words sufficiently anounced
Title:  the awful reverence with which his people received the communication of the
Title:  patriarch. None dared to answer, though all listened in breathless
Title:  expectation of what might follow. Uncas, however, looking in his face with
Title:  the fondness and veneration of a favored child, presumed on his own high and
Title:  acknowledged rank, to reply.
Title:  
Title:  Four warriors of his race have lived and died, he said, since the friend of
Title:  Tamenund led his people in battle. The blood of the turtle has been in many
Title:  chiefs, but all have gone back into the earth from whence they came, except
Title:  Chingachgook and his son.
Title:  
Title:  It is true - it is true, returned the sage, a flash of recollection
Title:  destroying all his pleasing fancies, and restoring him at once to a
Title:  consciousness of the true history of his nation. Our wise men have often
Title:  said that two warriors of the unchanged race were in the hills of the
Title:  Yengeese; why have their seats at the council-fires of the Delawares been so
Title:  long empty?
Title:  
Title:  At these words the young man raised his head, which he had still kept bowed
Title:  a little, in reverence; and lifting his voice so as to be heard by the
Title:  multitude, as if to explain at once and forever the policy of his family, he
Title:  said aloud:
Title:  
Title:  Once we slept where we could hear the salt lake speak in its anger. Then we
Title:  were rulers and Sagamores over the land. But when a pale face was seen on
Title:  every brook, we followed the deer back to the river of our nation. The
Title:  Delawares were gone. Few warriors of them all stayed to drink of the stream
Title:  they loved. Then said my fathers, Here will we hunt. The waters of the river
Title:  go into the salt lake. If we go toward the setting sun, we shall find
Title:  streams that run into the great lakes of sweet water; there would a Mohican
Title:  die, like fishes of the sea, in the clear springs. When the Manitou is ready
Title:  and shall say Come, we will follow the river to the sea, and take our own
Title:  again. Such, Delawares, is the belief of the children of the Turtle. Our
Title:  eyes are on the rising and not toward the setting sun. We know whence he
Title:  comes, but we know not whither he goes. It is enough.
Title:  
Title:  The men of the Lenape listened to his words with all the respect that
Title:  superstition could lend, finding a secret charm even in the figurative
Title:  language with which the young Sagamore imparted his ideas. Uncas himself
Title:  watched the effect of his brief explanation with intelligent eyes, and
Title:  gradually dropped the air of authority he had assumed, as he perceived that
Title:  his auditors were content. Then, permitting his looks to wander over the
Title:  silent throng that crowded around the elevated seat of Tamenund, he first
Title:  perceived Hawkeye in his bonds. Stepping eagerly from his stand, he made way
Title:  for himself to the side of his friend; and cutting his thongs with a quick
Title:  and angry stroke of his own knife, he motioned to the crowd to divide. The
Title:  Indians silently obeyed, and once more they stood ranged in their circle, as
Title:  before his appearance among them. Uncas took the scout by the hand, and led
Title:  him to the feet of the patriarch.
Title:  
Title:  Father, he said, look at this pale face; a just man, and the friend of the
Title:  Delawares.
Title:  
Title:  Is he a son of Minquon?
Title:  
Title:  Not so; a warrior known to the Yengeese, and feared by the Maquas.
Title:  
Title:  What name has he gained by his deeds?
Title:  
Title:  We call him Hawkeye, Uncas replied, using the Delaware phrase; for his sight
Title:  never fails. The Mingoes know him better by the death he gives their
Title:  warriors; with them he is The Long Rifle.
Title:  
Title:  La Longue Carabine! exclaimed Tamenund, opening his eyes, and regarding the
Title:  scout sternly. My son has not done well to call him friend.
Title:  
Title:  I call him so who proves himself such, returned the young chief, with great
Title:  calmness, but with a steady mien. If Uncas is welcome among the Delawares,
Title:  then is Hawkeye with his friends.
Title:  
Title:  The pale face has slain my young men; his name is great for the blows he has
Title:  struck the Lenape.
Title:  
Title:  If a Mingo has whispered that much in the ear of the Delaware, he has only
Title:  shown that he is a singing-bird, said the scout, who now believed that it
Title:  was time to vindicate himself from such offensive charges, and who spoke as
Title:  the man he addressed, modifying his Indian figures, however, with his own
Title:  peculiar notions. That I have slain the Maquas I am not the man to deny,
Title:  even at their own council-fires; but that, knowingly, my hand has never
Title:  harmed a Delaware, is opposed to the reason of my gifts, which is friendly
Title:  to them, and all that belongs to their nation.
Title:  
Title:  A low exclamation of applause passed among the warriors who exchanged looks
Title:  with each other like men that first began to perceive their error.
Title:  
Title:  Where is the Huron? demanded Tamenund. Has he stopped my ears?
Title:  
Title:  Magua, whose feelings during that scene in which Uncas had triumphed may be
Title:  much better imagined than described, answered to the call by stepping boldly
Title:  in front of the patriarch.
Title:  
Title:  The just Tamenund, he said, will not keep what a Huron has lent.
Title:  
Title:  Tell me, son of my brother, returned the sage, avoiding the dark countenance
Title:  of Le Subtil, and turning gladly to the more ingenuous features of Uncas,
Title:  has the stranger a conqueror's right over you?
Title:  
Title:  He has none. The panther may get into snares set by the women; but he is
Title:  strong, and knows how to leap through them.
Title:  
Title:  La Longue Carabine?
Title:  
Title:  Laughs at the Mingoes. Go, Huron, ask your squaws the color of a bear.
Title:  
Title:  The stranger and white maiden that come into my camp together?
Title:  
Title:  Should journey on an open path.
Title:  
Title:  And the woman that Huron left with my warriors?
Title:  
Title:  Uncas made no reply.
Title:  
Title:  And the woman that the Mingo has brought into my camp? repeated Tamenund,
Title:  gravely.
Title:  
Title:  She is mine, cried Magua, shaking his hand in triumph at Uncas. Mohican, you
Title:  know that she is mine.
Title:  
Title:  My son is silent, said Tamenund, endeavoring to read the expression of the
Title:  face that the youth turned from him in sorrow.
Title:  
Title:  It is so, was the low answer.
Title:  
Title:  A short and impressive pause succeeded, during which it was very apparent
Title:  with what reluctance the multitude admitted the justice of the Mingo's
Title:  claim. At length the sage, on whom alone the decision depended, said, in a
Title:  firm voice:
Title:  
Title:  Huron, depart.
Title:  
Title:  As he came, just Tamenund, demanded the wily Magua, or with hands filled
Title:  with the faith of the Delawares? The wigwam of Le Renard Subtil is empty.
Title:  Make him strong with his own.
Title:  
Title:  The aged man mused with himself for a time; and then, bending his head
Title:  toward one of his venerable companions, he asked:
Title:  
Title:  Are my ears open?
Title:  
Title:  It is true.
Title:  
Title:  Is this Mingo a chief?
Title:  
Title:  The first in his nation.
Title:  
Title:  Girl, what wouldst thou? A great warrior takes thee to wife. Go! thy race
Title:  will not end.
Title:  
Title:  Better, a thousand times, it should, exclaimed the horror-struck Cora, than
Title:  meet with such a degradation!
Title:  
Title:  Huron, her mind is in the tents of her fathers. An unwilling maiden makes an
Title:  unhappy wigwam.
Title:  
Title:  She speaks with the tongue of her people, returned Magua, regarding his
Title:  victim with a look of bitter irony.
Title:  
Title:  She is of a race of traders, and will bargain for a bright look. Let
Title:  Tamenund speak the words.
Title:  
Title:  Take you the wampum, and our love.
Title:  
Title:  Nothing hence but what Magua brought hither.
Title:  
Title:  Then depart with thine own. The Great Manitou forbids that a Delaware should
Title:  be unjust.
Title:  
Title:  Magua advanced, and seized his captive strongly by the arm; the Delawares
Title:  fell back, in silence; and Cora, as if conscious that remonstrance would be
Title:  useless, prepared to submit to her fate without resistance.
Title:  
Title:  Hold, hold! cried Duncan, springing forward; Huron, have mercy! her ransom
Title:  shall make thee richer than any of thy people were ever yet known to be.
Title:  
Title:  Magua is a red-skin; he wants not the beads of the pale faces.
Title:  
Title:  Gold, silver, powder, lead - all that a warrior needs shall be in thy
Title:  wigwam; all that becomes the greatest chief.
Title:  
Title:  Le Subtil is very strong, cried Magua, violently shaking the hand which
Title:  grasped the unresisting arm of Cora; he has his revenge!
Title:  
Title:  Mighty ruler of Providence! exclaimed Heyward, clasping his hands together
Title:  in agony, can this be suffered! To you, just Tamenund, I appeal for mercy.
Title:  
Title:  The words of the Delaware are said, returned the sage, closing his eyes, and
Title:  dropping back into his seat, alike wearied with his mental and his bodily
Title:  exertion. Men speak not twice.
Title:  
Title:  That a chief should not misspend his time in unsaying what has once been
Title:  spoken is wise and reasonable, said Hawkeye, motioning to Duncan to be
Title:  silent; but it is also prudent in every warrior to consider well before he
Title:  strikes his tomahawk into the head of his prisoner. Huron, I love you not;
Title:  nor can I say that any Mingo has ever received much favor at my hands. It is
Title:  fair to conclude that, if this war does not soon end, many more of your
Title:  warriors will meet me in the woods. Put it to your judgment, then, whether
Title:  you would prefer taking such a prisoner as that into your encampment, or one
Title:  like myself, who am a man that it would greatly rejoice your nation to see
Title:  with naked hands.
Title:  
Title:  Will The Long Rifle give his life for the woman? demanded Magua,
Title:  hesitatingly; for he had already made a motion toward quitting the place
Title:  with his victim.
Title:  
Title:  No, no; I have not said so much as that, returned Hawkeye, drawing back with
Title:  suitable discretion, when he noted the eagerness with which Magua listened
Title:  to his proposal. It would be an unequal exchange, to give a warrior, in the
Title:  prime of his age and usefulness, for the best woman on the frontiers. I
Title:  might consent to go into winter quarters, now - at least six weeks afore the
Title:  leaves will turn - on condition you will release the maiden.
Title:  
Title:  Magua shook his head, and made an impatient sign for the crowd to open.
Title:  
Title:  Well, then, added the scout, with the musing air of a man who had not half
Title:  made up his mind; I will throw killdeer into the bargain. Take the word of
Title:  an experienced hunter, the piece has not its equal atween the provinces.
Title:  
Title:  Magua still disdained to reply, continuing his efforts to disperse the
Title:  crowd.
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps, added the scout, losing his dissembled coolness exactly in
Title:  proportion as the other manifested an indifference to the exchange, if I
Title:  should condition to teach your young men the real virtue of the we'pon, it
Title:  would smoothe the little differences in our judgments.
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard fiercely ordered the Delawares, who still lingered in an
Title:  impenetrable belt around him, in hopes he would listen to the amicable
Title:  proposal, to open his path, threatening, by the glance of his eye, another
Title:  appeal to the infallible justice of their prophet.
Title:  
Title:  What is ordered must sooner or later arrive, continued Hawkeye, turning with
Title:  a sad and humbled look to Uncas. The varlet knows his advantage and will
Title:  keep it! God bless you, boy; you have found friends among your natural kin,
Title:  and I hope they will prove as true as some you have met who had no Indian
Title:  cross. As for me, sooner or later, I must die; it is, therefore, fortunate
Title:  there are but few to make my death-howl. After all, it is likely the imps
Title:  would have managed to master my scalp, so a day or two will make no great
Title:  difference in the everlasting reckoning of time. God bless you, added the
Title:  rugged woodsman, bending his head aside, and then instantly changing its
Title:  direction again, with a wistful look toward the youth; I loved both you and
Title:  your father, Uncas, though our skins are not altogether of a color, and our
Title:  gifts are somewhat difficult. Tell the Sagamore I never lost sight of him in
Title:  my greatest trouble; and, as for you, think of me sometimes when on a lucky
Title:  trail, and depend on it, boy, whether there be one heaven or two, there is a
Title:  path in the other world by which honest men may come together again. You'll
Title:  find the rifle in the place we hid it; take it, and keep it for my sake;
Title:  and, harkee, lad, as your natural gifts don't deny you the use of vengeance,
Title:  use it a little freely on the Mingoes; it may unburden griefs at my loss,
Title:  and ease your mind. Huron, I accept your offer; release the woman. I am your
Title:  prisoner!
Title:  
Title:  A suppressed, but still distinct murmur of approbation ran through the crowd
Title:  at this generous proposition; even the fiercest among the Delaware warriors
Title:  manifesting pleasure at the manliness of the intended sacrifice. Magua
Title:  paused, and for an anxious moment, it might be said, he doubted; then,
Title:  casting his eyes on Cora, with an expression in which ferocity and
Title:  admiration were strangely mingled, his purpose became fixed forever.
Title:  
Title:  He intimated his contempt of the offer with a backward motion of his head,
Title:  and said, in a steady and settled voice:
Title:  
Title:  Le Renard Subtil is a great chief; he has but one mind. Come, he added,
Title:  laying his hand too familiarly on the shoulder of his captive to urge her
Title:  onward; a Huron is no tattler; we will go.
Title:  
Title:  The maiden drew back in lofty womanly reserve, and her dark eye kindled,
Title:  while the rich blood shot, like the passing brightness of the sun, into her
Title:  very temples, at the indignity.
Title:  
Title:  I am your prisoner, and, at a fitting time shall be ready to follow, even to
Title:  my death. But violence is unnecessary, she coldly said; and immediately
Title:  turning to Hawkeye, added: Generous hunter! from my soul I thank you. Your
Title:  offer is vain, neither could it be accepted; but still you may serve me,
Title:  even more than in your own noble intention. Look at that drooping humbled
Title:  child! Abandon her not until you leave her in the habitations of civilized
Title:  men. I will not say, wringing the hard hand of the scout, that her father
Title:  will reward you - for such as you are above the rewards of men - but he will
Title:  thank you and bless you. And, believe me, the blessing of a just and aged
Title:  man has virtue in the sight of Heaven. Would to God I could hear one word
Title:  from his lips at this awful moment! Her voice became choked, and, for an
Title:  instant, she was silent; then, advancing a step nigher to Duncan, who was
Title:  supporting her unconscious sister, she continued, in more subdued tones, but
Title:  in which feeling and the habits of her sex maintained a fearful struggle: I
Title:  need not tell you to cherish the treasure you will possess. You love her,
Title:  Heyward; that would conceal a thousand faults, though she had them. She is
Title:  kind, gentle, sweet, good, as mortal may be. There is not a blemish in mind
Title:  or person at which the proudest of you all would sicken. She is fair - oh!
Title:  how surpassingly fair! laying her own beautiful, but less brilliant, hand in
Title:  melancholy affection on the alabaster forehead of Alice, and parting the
Title:  golden hair which clustered about her brows; and yet her soul is pure and
Title:  spotless as her skin! I could say much - more, perhaps, than cooler reason
Title:  would approve; but I will spare you and myself - Her voice became inaudible,
Title:  and her face was bent over the form of her sister. After a long and burning
Title:  kiss, she arose, and with features of the hue of death, but without even a
Title:  tear in her feverish eye, she turned away, and added, to the savage, with
Title:  all her former elevation of manner: Now, sir, if it be your pleasure, I will
Title:  follow.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, go, cried Duncan, placing Alice in the arms of an Indian girl; go,
Title:  Magua, go. these Delawares have their laws, which forbid them to detain you;
Title:  but I - I have no such obligation. Go, malignant monster - why do you delay?
Title:  
Title:  It would be difficult to describe the expression with which Magua listened
Title:  to this threat to follow. There was at first a fierce and manifest display
Title:  of joy, and then it was instantly subdued in a look of cunning coldness.
Title:  
Title:  The words are open, he was content with answering, The Open Hand can come.
Title:  
Title:  Hold, cried Hawkeye, seizing Duncan by the arm, and detaining him by
Title:  violence; you know not the craft of the imp. He would lead you to an
Title:  ambushment, and your death -
Title:  
Title:  Huron, interrupted Uncas, who submissive to the stern customs of his people,
Title:  had been an attentive and grave listener to all that passed; Huron, the
Title:  justice of the Delawares comes from the Manitou. Look at the sun. He is now
Title:  in the upper branches of the hemlock. Your path is short and open. When he
Title:  is seen above the trees, there will be men on your trail.
Title:  
Title:  I hear a crow! exclaimed Magua, with a taunting laugh. Go! he added, shaking
Title:  his hand at the crowd, which had slowly opened to admit his passage. Where
Title:  are the petticoats of the Delawares! Let them send their arrows and their
Title:  guns to the Wyandots; they shall have venison to eat, and corn to hoe. Dogs,
Title:  rabbits, thieves - I spit on you!
Title:  
Title:  His parting gibes were listened to in a dead, boding silence, and, with
Title:  these biting words in his mouth, the triumphant Magua passed unmolested into
Title:  the forest, followed by his passive captive, and protected by the inviolable
Title:  laws of Indian hospitality.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 31
Title:  
Title:       Fluellen: Kill the poys and the luggage! 'Tis expressly against
Title:       the law of arms; 'tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now,
Title:       as can be offered in the 'orld
Title:  
Title:                                                            KING HENRY V
Title:  
Title:  So long as their enemy and his victim continued in sight, the multitude
Title:  remained motionless as beings charmed to the place by some power that was
Title:  friendly to the Huron; but, the instant he disappeared, it became tossed and
Title:  agitated by fierce and powerful passion. Uncas maintained his elevated
Title:  stand, keeping his eyes on the form of Cora, until the colors of her dress
Title:  were blended with the foliage of the forest; when he descended, and, moving
Title:  silently through the throng, he disappeared in that lodge from which he had
Title:  so recently issued. A few of the graver and more attentive warriors, who
Title:  caught the gleams of anger that shot from the eyes of the young chief in
Title:  passing, followed him to the place he had selected for his meditations.
Title:  After which, Tamenund and Alice were removed, and the women and children
Title:  were ordered to disperse. During the momentous hour that succeeded, the
Title:  encampment resembled a hive of troubled bees, who only awaited the
Title:  appearance and example of their leader to take some distant and momentous
Title:  flight.
Title:  
Title:  A young warrior at length issued from the lodge of Uncas; and, moving
Title:  deliberately, with a sort of grave march, toward a dwarf pine that grew in
Title:  the crevices of the rocky terrace, he tore the bark from its body, and then
Title:  turned whence he came without speaking. He was soon followed by another, who
Title:  stripped the sapling of its branches, leaving it a naked and blazed1 trunk.
Title:  A third colored the post with stripes of a dark red paint; all which
Title:  indications of a hostile design in the leaders of the nation were received
Title:  by the men without in a gloomy and ominous silence. Finally, the Mohican
Title:  himself reappeared, divested of all his attire, except his girdle and
Title:  leggings, and with one-half of his fine features hid under a cloud of
Title:  threatening black.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas moved with a slow and dignified tread toward the post, which he
Title:  immediately commenced encircling with a measured step, not unlike an ancient
Title:  dance, raising his voice, at the same time, in the wild and irregular chant
Title:  of his war song. The notes were in the extremes of human sounds; being
Title:  sometimes melancholy and exquisitely plaintive, even rivaling the melody of
Title:  birds - and then, by sudden and startling transitions, causing the auditors
Title:  to tremble by their depth and energy. The words were few and often repeated,
Title:  proceeding gradually from a sort of invocation, or hymn, to the Deity, to an
Title:  intimation of the warrior's object, and terminating as they commenced with
Title:  an acknowledgment of his own dependence on the Great Spirit. If it were
Title:  possible to translate the comprehensive and melodious language in which he
Title:  spoke, the ode might read something like the following:
Title:  
Title:       Manitou! Manitou! Manitou!
Title:       Thou art great, thou art good, thou art wise:
Title:       Manitou! Manitou!
Title:       Thou art just.
Title:  
Title:       In the heavens, in the clouds, oh, I see
Title:       Many spots - many dark, many red:
Title:       In the heavens, oh, I see
Title:       Many clouds.
Title:  
Title:       In the woods, in the air, oh, I hear
Title:       The whoop, the long yell, and the cry:
Title:       In the woods, oh, I hear
Title:       The loud whoop!
Title:  
Title:       Manitou! Manitou! Manitou!
Title:       I am weak - thou art strong; I am slow -
Title:       Manitou! Manitou!
Title:       Give me aid.
Title:  
Title:  At the end of what might be called each verse he made a pause, by raising a
Title:  note louder and longer than common, that was peculiarly suited to the
Title:  sentiment just expressed. The first close was solemn, and intended to convey
Title:  the idea of veneration; the second descriptive, bordering on the alarming;
Title:  and the third was the well-known and terrific war-whoop, which burst from
Title:  the lips of the young warrior, like a combination of all the frightful
Title:  sounds of battle. The last was like the first, humble and imploring. Three
Title:  times did he repeat this song, and as often did he encircle the post in his
Title:  dance.
Title:  
Title:  At the close of the first turn, a grave and highly esteemed chief of the
Title:  Lenape followed his example, singing words of his own, however, to music of
Title:  a similar character. Warrior after warrior enlisted in the dance, until all
Title:  of any renown and authority were numbered in its mazes. The spectacle now
Title:  became wildly terrific; the fierce-looking and menacing visages of the
Title:  chiefs receiving additional power from the appalling strains in which they
Title:  mingled their guttural tones. Just then Uncas struck his tomahawk deep into
Title:  the post, and raised his voice in a shout, which might be termed his own
Title:  battle cry. The act anounced that he had assumed the chief authority in the
Title:  intended expedition.
Title:  
Title:  It was a signal that awakened all the slumbering passions of the nation. A
Title:  hundred youths, who had hitherto been restrained by the diffidence of their
Title:  years, rushed in a frantic body on the fancied emblem of their enemy, and
Title:  severed it asunder, splinter by splinter, until nothing remained of the
Title:  trunk but its roots in the earth. During this moment of tumult, the most
Title:  ruthless deeds of war were performed on the fragments of the tree, with as
Title:  much apparent ferocity as if they were the living victims of their cruelty.
Title:  Some were scalped; some received the keen and trembling axe; and others
Title:  suffered by thrusts from the fatal knife. In short, the manifestations of
Title:  zeal and fierce delight were so great and unequivocal, that the expedition
Title:  was declared to be a war of the nation.
Title:  
Title:  The instant Uncas had struck the blow, he moved out of the circle, and cast
Title:  his eyes up to the sun, which was just gaining the point, when the truce
Title:  with Magua was to end. The fact was soon announced by a significant gesture,
Title:  accompanied by a corresponding cry; and the whole of the excited multitude
Title:  abandoned their mimic warfare, with shrill yells of pleasure, to prepare for
Title:  the more hazardous experiment of the reality.
Title:  
Title:  The whole face of the encampment was instantly changed. The warriors, who
Title:  were already armed and painted, became as still as if they were incapable of
Title:  any uncommon burst of emotion. On the other hand, the women broke out of the
Title:  lodges, with the songs of joy and those of lamentation so strangely mixed
Title:  that it might have been difficult to have said which passion preponderated.
Title:  None, however, was idle. Some bore their choicest articles, others their
Title:  young, and some their aged and infirm, into the forest, which spread itself
Title:  like a verdant carpet of bright green against the side of the mountain.
Title:  Thither Tamenund also retired, with calm composure, after a short and
Title:  touching interview with Uncas; from whom the sage separated with the
Title:  reluctance that a parent would quit a long lost and just recovered child. In
Title:  the meantime, Duncan saw Alice to a place of safety, and then sought the
Title:  scout, with a countenance that denoted how eagerly he also panted for the
Title:  approaching contest.
Title:  
Title:  But Hawkeye was too much accustomed to the war song and the enlistments of
Title:  the natives, to betray any interest in the passing scene. He merely cast an
Title:  occasional look at the number and quality of the warriors, who, from time to
Title:  time, signified their readiness to accompany Uncas to the field. In this
Title:  particular he was soon satisfied; for, as has been already seen, the power
Title:  of the young chief quickly embraced every fighting man in the nation. After
Title:  this material point was so satisfactorily decided, he despatched an Indian
Title:  boy in quest of killdeer and the rifle of Uncas, to the place where they had
Title:  deposited their weapons on approaching the camp of the Delawares; a measure
Title:  of double policy, inasmuch as it protected the arms from their own fate, if
Title:  detained as prisoners, and gave them the advantage of appearing among the
Title:  strangers rather as sufferers than as men provided with means of defense and
Title:  subsistence. In selecting another to perform the office of reclaiming his
Title:  highly prized rifle, the scout had lost sight of none of his habitual
Title:  caution. He knew that Magua had not come unattended, and he also knew that
Title:  Huron spies watched the movements of their new enemies, along the whole
Title:  boundary of the woods. It would, therefore, have been fatal to himself to
Title:  have attempted the experiment; a warrior would have fared no better; but the
Title:  danger of a boy would not be likely to commence until after his object was
Title:  discovered. When Heyward joined him, the scout was coolly awaiting the
Title:  result of this experiment.
Title:  
Title:  The boy , who had been well instructed, and was sufficiently crafty,
Title:  proceeded, with a bosom that was swelling with the pride of such a
Title:  confidence, and all the hopes of young ambition, carelessly across the
Title:  clearing to the wood, which he entered at a point at some little distance
Title:  from the place where the guns were secreted. The instant, however, he was
Title:  concealed by the foliage of the bushes, his dusky form was to be seen
Title:  gliding, like that of a serpent, toward the desired treasure. He was
Title:  successful; and in another moment he appeared flying across the narrow
Title:  opening that skirted the base of the terrace on which the village stood,
Title:  with the velocity of an arrow, and bearing a prize in each hand. He had
Title:  actually gained the crags, and was leaping up their sides with incredible
Title:  activity, when a shot from the woods showed how accurate had been the
Title:  judgment of the scout. The boy answered it with a feeble but contemptuous
Title:  shout; and immediately a second bullet was sent after him from another part
Title:  of the cover. At the next instant he appeared on the level above, elevating
Title:  his guns in triumph, while he moved with the air of a conqueror toward the
Title:  renowned hunter who had honored him by so glorious a commission.
Title:  
Title:  Notwithstanding the lively interest Hawkeye had taken in the fate of his
Title:  messenger, he received killdeer with a satisfaction that, momentarily, drove
Title:  all other recollections from his mind. After examining the piece with an
Title:  intelligent eye, and opening and shutting the pan some ten or fifteen times,
Title:  and trying sundry other equally important experiments on the lock, he turned
Title:  to the boy and demanded with great manifestations of kindness, if he was
Title:  hurt. The urchin looked proudly up in his face, but made no reply.
Title:  
Title:  Ah! I see, lad, the knaves have barked your arm! added the scout, taking up
Title:  the limb of the patient sufferer, across which a deep flesh wound had been
Title:  made by one of the bullets; but a little bruised alder will act like a
Title:  charm. In the meantime I will wrap it in a badge of wampum! You have
Title:  commenced the business of a warrior early, my brave boy, and are likely to
Title:  bear a plenty of honorable scars to your grave. I know many young men that
Title:  have taken scalps who cannot show such a mark as this. Go! having bound up
Title:  the arm; you will be a chief!
Title:  
Title:  The lad departed, prouder of his flowing blood than the vainest courtier
Title:  could be of his blushing ribbon; and stalked among the fellows of his age,
Title:  an object of general admiration and envy.
Title:  
Title:  But, in a moment of so many serious and important duties, this single act of
Title:  juvenile fortitude did not attract the general notice and commendation it
Title:  would have received under milder auspices. It had, however, served to
Title:  apprise the Delawares of the position and the intentions of their enemies.
Title:  Accordingly a party of adventurers, better suited to the task than the weak
Title:  though spirited boy, was ordered to dislodge the skulkers. The duty was soon
Title:  performed; for most of the Hurons retired of themselves when they found they
Title:  had been discovered. The Delawares followed to a sufficient distance from
Title:  their own encampment, and then halted for orders, apprehensive of being led
Title:  into an ambush. As both parties secreted themselves, the woods were again as
Title:  still and quiet as a mild summer morning and deep solitude could render
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  The calm but still impatient Uncas now collected his chiefs, and divided his
Title:  power. He presented Hawkeye as a warrior, often tried, and always found
Title:  deserving of confidence. When he found his friend met with a favorable
Title:  reception, he bestowed on him the command of twenty men, like himself,
Title:  active, skilful and resolute. He gave the Delawares to understand the rank
Title:  of Heyward among the troops of the Yengeese, and then tendered to him a
Title:  trust of equal authority. But Duncan declined the charge, professing his
Title:  readiness to serve as a volunteer by the side of the scout. After this
Title:  disposition, the young Mohican appointed various native chiefs to fill the
Title:  different situations of responsibility, and, the time pressing, he gave
Title:  forth the word to march. He was cheerfully, but silently obeyed by more than
Title:  two hundred men.
Title:  
Title:  Their entrance into the forest was perfectly unmolested; nor did they
Title:  encounter any living objects that could either give the alarm, or furnish
Title:  the intelligence they needed, until they came upon the lairs of their own
Title:  scouts. Here a halt was ordered, and the chiefs were assembled to hold a
Title:  whispering council.
Title:  
Title:  At this meeting divers plans of operation were suggested, though none of a
Title:  character to meet the wishes of their ardent leader. Had Uncas followed the
Title:  promptings of his own inclinations, he would have led his followers to the
Title:  charge without a moment's delay, and put the conflict to the hazard of an
Title:  instant issue; but such a course would have been in opposition to all the
Title:  received practises and opinions of his countrymen. He was, therefore, fain
Title:  to adopt a caution that in the present temper of his mind he execrated, and
Title:  to listen to advice at which his fiery spirit chafed, under the vivid
Title:  recollection of Cora's danger and Magua's insolence.
Title:  
Title:  After an unsatisfactory conference of many minutes, a solitary individual
Title:  was seen advancing from the side of the enemy, with such apparent haste, as
Title:  to induce the belief he might be a messenger charged with pacific overtures.
Title:  When within a hundred yards, however, of the cover behind which the Delaware
Title:  council had assembled, the stranger hesitated, appeared uncertain what
Title:  course to take, and finally halted. All eyes were turned now on Uncas, as if
Title:  seeking directions how to proceed.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye, said the young chief, in a low voice, he must never speak to the
Title:  Hurons again.
Title:  
Title:  His time has come, said the laconic scout, thrusting the long barrel of his
Title:  rifle through the leaves, and taking his deliberate and fatal aim. But,
Title:  instead of pulling the trigger, he lowered the muzzle again, and indulged
Title:  himself in a fit of his peculiar mirth. I took the imp for a Mingo, as I'm a
Title:  miserable sinner! he said; but when my eye ranged along his ribs for a place
Title:  to get the bullet in - would you think it, Uncas - I saw the musicianer's
Title:  blower; and so, after all, it is the man they call Gamut, whose death can
Title:  profit no one, and whose life, if this tongue can do anything but sing, may
Title:  be made serviceable to our own ends. If sounds have not lost their virtue,
Title:  I'll soon have a discourse with the honest fellow, and that in a voice he'll
Title:  find more agreeable than the speech of killdeer.
Title:  
Title:  So saying, Hawkeye laid aside his rifle; and, crawling through the bushes
Title:  until within hearing of David, he attempted to repeat the musical effort,
Title:  which had conducted himself, with so much safety and eclat, through the
Title:  Huron encampment. The exquisite organs of Gamut could not readily be
Title:  deceived (and, to say the truth, it would have been difficult for any other
Title:  than Hawkeye to produce a similar noise), and, consequently, having once
Title:  before heard the sounds, he now knew whence they proceeded. The poor fellow
Title:  appeared relieved from a state of great embarrassment; for, pursuing the
Title:  direction of the voice - a task that to him was not much less arduous that
Title:  it would have been to have gone up in the face of a battery - he soon
Title:  discovered the hidden songster.
Title:  
Title:  I wonder what the Hurons will think of that! said the scout, laughing, as he
Title:  took his companion by the arm, and urged him toward the rear. If the knaves
Title:  lie within earshot, they will say there are two non-compossers instead of
Title:  one! But here we are safe, he added, pointing to Uncas and his associates.
Title:  Now give us the history of the Mingo inventions in natural English, and
Title:  without any ups and downs of voice.
Title:  
Title:  David gazed about him, at the fierce and wild-looking chiefs, in mute
Title:  wonder; but assured by the presence of faces that he knew, he soon rallied
Title:  his faculties so far as to make an intelligent reply.
Title:  
Title:  The heathen are abroad in goodly numbers, said David; and, I fear, with evil
Title:  intent. There has been much howling and ungodly revelry, together with such
Title:  sounds as it is profanity to utter, in their habitations within the past
Title:  hour, so much so, in truth, that I have fled to the Delawares in search of
Title:  peace.
Title:  
Title:  Your ears might not have profited much by the exchange, had you been quicker
Title:  of foot, returned the scout a little dryly. But let that be as it may; where
Title:  are the Hurons?
Title:  
Title:  They lie hid in the forest, between this spot and their village in such
Title:  force, that prudence would teach you instantly to return.
Title:  
Title:  Uncas cast a glance along the range of trees which concealed his own band
Title:  and mentioned the name of:
Title:  
Title:  Magua?
Title:  
Title:  Is among them. He brought in the maiden that had sojourned with the
Title:  Delawares; and, leaving her in the cave, has put himself, like a raging
Title:  wolf, at the head of his savages. I know not what has troubled his spirit so
Title:  greatly!
Title:  
Title:  He has left her, you say, in the cave! interrupted Heyward; 'tis well that
Title:  we know its situation! May not something be done for her instant relief?
Title:  
Title:  Uncas looked earnestly at the scout, before he asked:
Title:  
Title:  What says Hawkeye?
Title:  
Title:  Give me twenty rifles, and I will turn to the right, along the stream; and,
Title:  passing by the huts of the beaver, will join the Sagamore and the colonel.
Title:  You shall then hear the whoop from that quarter; with this wind one may
Title:  easily send it a mile. Then, Uncas, do you drive in the front; when they
Title:  come within range of our pieces, we will give them a blow that, I pledge the
Title:  good name of an old frontiersman, shall make their line bend like an ashen
Title:  bow. After which, we will carry the village, and take the woman from the
Title:  cave; when the affair may be finished with the tribe, according to a white
Title:  man's battle, by a blow and a victory; or, in the Indian fashion, with dodge
Title:  and cover. There may be no great learning, major, in this plan, but with
Title:  courage and patience it can all be done.
Title:  
Title:  I like it very much, cried Duncan, who saw that the release of Cora was the
Title:  primary object in the mind of the scout; I like it much. Let it be instantly
Title:  attempted.
Title:  
Title:  After a short conference, the plan was matured, and rendered more
Title:  intelligible to the several parties; the different signals were appointed,
Title:  and the chiefs separated, each to his allotted station.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 A tree which has been partially or entirely stripped of its bark is said,
Title:  in the language of the country, to be blazed. The term is strictly English,
Title:  for a horse is said to be blazed when it has a white mark.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 32
Title:  
Title:       But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
Title:       Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
Title:       To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.
Title:  
Title:                                                                    POPE
Title:  
Title:  During the time Uncas was making this disposition of his forces, the woods
Title:  were as still, and, with the exception of those who had met in council,
Title:  apparently as much untenanted as when they came fresh from the hands of
Title:  their Almighty Creator. The eye could range, in every direction, through the
Title:  long and shadowed vistas of the trees; but nowhere was any object to be seen
Title:  that did not properly belong to the peaceful and slumbering scenery.
Title:  
Title:  Here and there a bird was heard fluttering among the branches of the
Title:  beeches, and occasionally a squirrel dropped a nut, drawing the startled
Title:  looks of the party for a moment to the place; but the instant the casual
Title:  interruption ceased, the passing air was heard murmuring above their heads,
Title:  along that verdant and undulating surface of forest, which spread itself
Title:  unbroken, unless by stream or lake, over such a vast region of country.
Title:  Across the tract of wilderness which lay between the Delawares and the
Title:  village of their enemies, it seemed as if the foot of man had never trodden,
Title:  so breathing and deep was the silence in which it lay. But Hawkeye, whose
Title:  duty led him foremost in the adventure, knew the character of those with
Title:  whom he was about to contend too well to trust the treacherous quiet.
Title:  
Title:  When he saw his little band collected, the scout threw killdeer into the
Title:  hollow of his arm, and making a silent signal that he would be followed, he
Title:  led them many rods toward the rear, into the bed of a little brook which
Title:  they had crossed in advancing. Here he halted, and after waiting for the
Title:  whole of his grave and attentive warriors to close about him, he spoke in
Title:  Delaware, demanding:
Title:  
Title:  Do any of my young men know whither this run will lead us?
Title:  
Title:  A Delaware stretched forth a hand, with the two fingers separated, and
Title:  indicating the manner in which they were joined at the root, he answered:
Title:  
Title:  Before the sun could go his own length, the little water will be in the big.
Title:  Then he added, pointing in the direction of the place he mentioned, the two
Title:  make enough for the beavers.
Title:  
Title:  I thought as much, returned the scout, glancing his eye upward at the
Title:  opening in the tree-tops, from the course it takes, and the bearings of the
Title:  mountains. Men, we will keep within the cover of its banks till we scent the
Title:  Hurons.
Title:  
Title:  His companions gave the usual brief exclamation of assent, but, perceiving
Title:  that their leader was about to lead the way in person, one or two made signs
Title:  that all was not as it should be. Hawkeye, who comprehended their meaning
Title:  glances, turned and perceived that his party had been followed thus far by
Title:  the singing-master.
Title:  
Title:  Do you know, friend, asked the scout, gravely, and perhaps with a little of
Title:  the pride of conscious deserving in his manner, that this is a band of
Title:  rangers chosen for the most desperate service, and put under the command of
Title:  one who, though another might say it with a better face, will not be apt to
Title:  leave them idle. It may not be five, it cannot be thirty minutes, before we
Title:  tread on the body of a Huron, living or dead.
Title:  
Title:  Though not admonished of your intentions in words, returned David, whose
Title:  face was a little flushed, and whose ordinarily quiet and unmeaning eyes
Title:  glimmered with an expression of unusual fire, your men have reminded me of
Title:  the children of Jacob going out to battle against the Shechemites, for
Title:  wickedly aspiring to wedlock with a woman of a race that was favored of the
Title:  Lord. Now, I have journeyed far, and sojourned much in good and evil with
Title:  the maiden ye seek; and, though not a man of war, with my loins girded and
Title:  my sword sharpened, yet would I gladly strike a blow in her behalf.
Title:  
Title:  The scout hesitated, as if weighing the chances of such a strange enlistment
Title:  in his mind before he answered:
Title:  
Title:  You know not the use of any we'pon. You carry no rifle; and believe me, what
Title:  the Mingoes take they will freely give again.
Title:  
Title:  Though not a vaunting and bloodily disposed Goliath, returned David, drawing
Title:  a sling from beneath his parti-colored and uncouth attire, I have not
Title:  forgotten the example of the Jewish boy. With this ancient instrument of war
Title:  have I practised much in my youth, and peradventure the skill has not
Title:  entirely departed from me.
Title:  
Title:  Ay! said Hawkeye, considering the deer-skin thong and apron, with a cold and
Title:  discouraging eye; the thing might do its work among arrows, or even knives;
Title:  but these Mengwe have been furnished by the Frenchers with a good grooved
Title:  barrel a man. However, it seems to be your gift to go unharmed amid fire;
Title:  and as you have hitherto been favored - major, you have left your rifle at a
Title:  cock; a single shot before the time would be just twenty scalps lost to no
Title:  purpose - singer, you can follow; we may find use for you in the shoutings.
Title:  
Title:  I thank you, friend, returned David, supplying himself, like his royal
Title:  namesake, from among the pebbles of the brook; though not given to the
Title:  desire to kill, had you sent me away my spirit would have been troubled.
Title:  
Title:  Remember, added the scout, tapping his own head significantly on that spot
Title:  where Gamut was yet sore, we come to fight, and not to musickate. Until the
Title:  general whoop is given, nothing speaks but the rifle.
Title:  
Title:  David nodded, as much to signify his acquiescence with the terms; and then
Title:  Hawkeye, casting another observant glance over this followers made the
Title:  signal to proceed.
Title:  
Title:  Their route lay, for the distance of a mile, along the bed of the
Title:  water-course. Though protected from any great danger of observation by the
Title:  precipitous banks, and the thick shrubbery which skirted the stream, no
Title:  precaution known to an Indian attack was neglected. A warrior rather crawled
Title:  than walked on each flank so as to catch occasional glimpses into the
Title:  forest; and every few minutes the band came to a halt, and listened for
Title:  hostile sounds, with an acuteness of organs that would be scarcely
Title:  conceivable to a man in a less natural state. Their march was, however,
Title:  unmolested, and they reached the point where the lesser stream was lost in
Title:  the greater, without the smallest evidence that their progress had been
Title:  noted. Here the scout again halted, to consult the signs of the forest.
Title:  
Title:  We are likely to have a good day for a fight, he said, in English,
Title:  addressing Heyward, and glancing his eyes upward at the clouds, which began
Title:  to move in broad sheets across the firmament; a bright sun and a glittering
Title:  barrel are no friends to true sight. Everything is favorable; they have the
Title:  wind, which will bring down their noises and their smoke, too, no little
Title:  matter in itself; whereas, with us it will be first a shot, and then a clear
Title:  view. But here is an end to our cover; the beavers have had the range of
Title:  this stream for hundreds of years, and what atween their food and their
Title:  dams, there is, as you see, many a girdled stub, but few living trees.
Title:  
Title:  Hawkeye had, in truth, in these few words, given no bad description of the
Title:  prospect that now lay in their front. The brook was irregular in its width,
Title:  sometimes shooting through narrow fissures in the rocks, and at others
Title:  spreading over acres of bottom land, forming little areas that might be
Title:  termed ponds. Everywhere along its bands were the moldering relics of dead
Title:  trees, in all the stages of decay, from those that groaned on their
Title:  tottering trunks to such as had recently been robbed of those rugged coats
Title:  that so mysteriously contain their principle of life. A few long, low, and
Title:  moss-covered piles were scattered among them, like the memorials of a former
Title:  and long-departed generation.
Title:  
Title:  All these minute particulars were noted by the scout, with a gravity and
Title:  interest that they probably had never before attracted. He knew that the
Title:  Huron encampment lay a short half mile up the brook; and, with the
Title:  characteristic anxiety of one who dreaded a hidden danger, he was greatly
Title:  troubled at not finding the smallest trace of the presence of his enemy.
Title:  Once or twice he felt induced to give the order for a rush, and to attempt
Title:  the village by surprise; but his experience quickly admonished him of the
Title:  danger of so useless an experiment. Then he listened intently, and with
Title:  painful uncertainty, for the sounds of hostility in the quarter where Uncas
Title:  was left; but nothing was audible except the sighing of the wind, that began
Title:  to sweep over the bosom of the forest in gusts which threatened a tempest.
Title:  At length, yielding rather to his unusual impatience than taking counsel
Title:  from his knowledge, he determined to bring matters to an issue, by unmasking
Title:  his force, and proceeding cautiously, but steadily, up the stream.
Title:  
Title:  The scout had stood, while making his observations, sheltered by a brake,
Title:  and his companions still lay in the bed of the ravine, through which the
Title:  smaller stream debouched; but on hearing his low, though intelligible,
Title:  signal the whole party stole up the bank, like so many dark specters, and
Title:  silently arranged themselves around him. Pointing in the direction he wished
Title:  to proceed, Hawkeye advanced, the band breaking off in single files, and
Title:  following so accurately in his footsteps, as to leave it, if we except
Title:  Heyward and David, the trail of but a single man.
Title:  
Title:  The party was, however, scarcely uncovered before a volley from a dozen
Title:  rifles was heard in their rear; and a Delaware leaping high in to the air,
Title:  like a wounded deer, fell at his whole length, dead.
Title:  
Title:  Ah, I feared some deviltry like this! exclaimed the scout, in English,
Title:  adding, with the quickness of thought, in his adopted tongue: To cover, men,
Title:  and charge!
Title:  
Title:  The band dispersed at the word, and before Heyward had well recovered from
Title:  his surprise, he found himself standing alone with David. Luckily the Hurons
Title:  had already fallen back, and he was safe from their fire. But this state of
Title:  things was evidently to be of short continuance; for the scout set the
Title:  example of pressing on their retreat, by discharging his rifle, and darting
Title:  from tree to tree as his enemy slowly yielded ground.
Title:  
Title:  It would seem that the assault had been made by a very small party of the
Title:  Hurons, which, however, continued to increase in numbers, as it retired on
Title:  its friends, until the return fire was very nearly, if not quite, equal to
Title:  that maintained by the advancing Delawares. Heyward threw himself among the
Title:  combatants, and imitating the necessary caution of his companions, he made
Title:  quick discharges with his own rifle. The contest now grew warm and
Title:  stationary. Few were injured, as both parties kept their bodies as much
Title:  protected as possible by the trees; never, indeed, exposing any part of
Title:  their persons except in the act of taking aim. But the chances were
Title:  gradually growing unfavorable to Hawkeye and his band. The quick-sighted
Title:  scout perceived his danger without knowing how to remedy it. He saw it was
Title:  more dangerous to retreat than to maintain his ground: while he found his
Title:  enemy throwing out men on his flank; which rendered the task of keeping
Title:  themselves covered so very difficult to the Delawares, as nearly to silence
Title:  their fire. At this embarrassing moment, when they began to think the whole
Title:  of the hostile tribe was gradually encircling them, they heard the yell of
Title:  combatants and the rattling of arms echoing under the arches of the wood at
Title:  the place where Uncas was posted, a bottom which, in a manner, lay beneath
Title:  the ground on which Hawkeye and his party were contending.
Title:  
Title:  The effects of this attack were instantaneous, and to the scout and his
Title:  friends greatly relieving. It would seem that, while his own surprise had
Title:  been anticipated, and had consequently failed, the enemy, in their turn,
Title:  having been deceived in its object and in his numbers, had left too small a
Title:  force to resist the impetuous onset of the young Mohican. This fact was
Title:  doubly apparent, by the rapid manner in which the battle in the forest
Title:  rolled upward toward the village, and by an instant falling off in the
Title:  number of their assailants, who rushed to assist in maintaining the front,
Title:  and, as it now proved to be, the principal point of defense.
Title:  
Title:  Animating his followers by his voice, and his own example, Hawkeye then gave
Title:  the word to bear down upon their foes. The charge, in that rude species of
Title:  warfare, consisted merely in pushing from cover to cover, nigher to the
Title:  enemy; and in this maneuver he was instantly and successfully obeyed. The
Title:  Hurons were compelled to withdraw, and the scene of the contest rapidly
Title:  changed from the more open ground, on which it had commenced, to a spot
Title:  where the assailed found a thicket to rest upon. Here the struggle was
Title:  protracted, arduous and seemingly of doubtful issue; the Delawares, though
Title:  none of them fell, beginning to bleed freely, in consequence of the
Title:  disadvantage at which they were held.
Title:  
Title:  In this crisis, Hawkeye found means to get behind the same tree as that
Title:  which served for a cover to Heyward; most of his own combatants being within
Title:  call, a little on his right, where they maintained rapid, though fruitless,
Title:  discharges on their sheltered enemies.
Title:  
Title:  You are a young man, major, said the scout, dropping the butt of killdeer to
Title:  the earth, and leaning on the barrel, a little fatigued with his previous
Title:  industry; and it may be your gift to lead armies, at some future day, ag'in
Title:  these imps, the Mingoes. You may here see the philosophy of an Indian fight.
Title:  It consists mainly in ready hand, a quick eye and a good cover. Now, if you
Title:  had a company of the Royal Americans here, in what manner would you set them
Title:  to work in this business?
Title:  
Title:  The bayonet would make a road.
Title:  
Title:  Ay, there is white reason in what you say; but a man must ask himself, in
Title:  this wilderness, how many lives he can spare. No - horse1, continued the
Title:  scout, shaking his head, like one who mused; horse, I am ashamed to say must
Title:  sooner or later decide these scrimmages. The brutes are better than men, and
Title:  to horse must we come at last. Put a shodden hoof on the moccasin of a
Title:  red-skin, and, if his rifle be once emptied, he will never stop to load it
Title:  again.
Title:  
Title:  This is a subject that might better be discussed at another time, returned
Title:  Heyward; shall we charge?
Title:  
Title:  I see no contradiction to the gifts of any man in passing his breathing
Title:  spells in useful reflections, the scout replied. As to rush, I little relish
Title:  such a measure; for a scalp or two must be thrown away in the attempt. And
Title:  yet, he added, bending his head aside, to catch the sounds of the distant
Title:  combat, if we are to be of use to Uncas, these knaves in our front must be
Title:  got rid of.
Title:  
Title:  Then, turning with a prompt and decided air, he called aloud to his Indians,
Title:  in their own language. His words were answered by a shout; and, at a given
Title:  signal, each warrior made a swift movement around his particular tree. The
Title:  sight of so many dark bodies, glancing before their eyes at the same
Title:  instant, drew a hasty and consequently an ineffectual fire from the Hurons.
Title:  Without stopping to breathe, the Delawares leaped in long bounds toward the
Title:  wood, like so many panthers springing upon their prey. Hawkeye was in front,
Title:  brandishing his terrible rifle and animating his followers by his example. A
Title:  few of the older and more cunning Hurons, who had not been deceived by the
Title:  artifice which had been practiced to draw their fire, now made a close and
Title:  deadly discharge of their pieces and justified the apprehensions of the
Title:  scout by felling three of his foremost warriors. But the shock was
Title:  insufficient to repel the impetus of the charge. The Delawares broke into
Title:  the cover with the ferocity of their natures and swept away every trace of
Title:  resistance by the fury of the onset.
Title:  
Title:  The combat endured only for an instant, hand to hand, and then the assailed
Title:  yielded ground rapidly, until they reached the opposite margin of the
Title:  thicket, where they clung to the cover, with the sort of obstinacy that is
Title:  so often witnessed in hunted brutes. At this critical moment, when the
Title:  success of the struggle was again becoming doubtful, the crack of a rifle
Title:  was heard behind the Hurons, and a bullet came whizzing from among some
Title:  beaver lodges, which were situated in the clearing, in their rear, and was
Title:  followed by the fierce and appalling yell of the war-whoop.
Title:  
Title:  There speaks the Sagamore! shouted Hawkeye, answering the cry with his own
Title:  stentorian voice; we have them now in face and back!
Title:  
Title:  The effect on the Hurons was instantaneous. Discouraged by an assault from a
Title:  quarter that left them no opportunity for cover, the warriors uttered a
Title:  common yell of disappointment, and breaking off in a body, they spread
Title:  themselves across the opening, heedless of every consideration but flight.
Title:  Many fell, in making the experiment, under the bullets and the blows of the
Title:  pursuing Delawares.
Title:  
Title:  We shall not pause to detail the meeting between the scout and Chingachgook,
Title:  or the more touching interview that Duncan held with Munro. A few brief and
Title:  hurried words served to explain the state of things to both parties; and
Title:  then Hawkeye, pointing out the Sagamore to his band, resigned the chief
Title:  authority into the hands of the Mohican chief. Chingachgook assumed the
Title:  station to which his birth and experience gave him so distinguished a claim,
Title:  with the grave dignity that always gives force to the mandates of a native
Title:  warrior. Following the footsteps of the scout, he led the party back through
Title:  the thicket, his men scalping the fallen Hurons and secreting the bodies of
Title:  their own dead as they proceeded, until they gained a point where the former
Title:  was content to make a halt.
Title:  
Title:  The warriors, who had breathed themselves freely in the preceding struggle,
Title:  were now posted on a bit of level ground, sprinkled with trees in sufficient
Title:  numbers to conceal them. The land fell away rather precipitately in front,
Title:  and beneath their eyes stretched, for several miles, a narrow, dark, and
Title:  wooded vale. It was through this dense and dark forest that Uncas was still
Title:  contending with the main body of the Hurons.
Title:  
Title:  The Mohican and his friends advanced to the brow of the hill, and listened,
Title:  with practised ears, to the sounds of the combat. A few birds hovered over
Title:  the leafy bosom of the valley, frightened from their secluded nests; and
Title:  here and there a light vapory cloud, which seemed already blending with the
Title:  atmosphere, arose above the trees, and indicated some spot where the
Title:  struggle had been fierce and stationary.
Title:  
Title:  The fight is coming up the ascent, said Duncan, pointing in the direction of
Title:  a new explosion of firearms; we are too much in the center of their line to
Title:  be effective.
Title:  
Title:  They will incline into the hollow, where the cover is thicker, said the
Title:  scout, and that will leave us well on their flank. Go, Sagamore; you will
Title:  hardly be in time to give the whoop, and lead on the young men. I will fight
Title:  this scrimmage with warriors of my own color. You know me, Mohican; not a
Title:  Huron of them all shall cross the swell, into your rear, without the notice
Title:  of killdeer.
Title:  
Title:  The Indian chief paused another moment to consider the signs of the contest,
Title:  which was now rolling rapidly up the ascent, a certain evidence that the
Title:  Delawares triumphed; nor did he actually quit the place until admonished of
Title:  the proximity of his friends, as well as enemies, by the bullets of the
Title:  former, which began to patter among the dried leaves on the ground, like the
Title:  bits of falling hail which precede the bursting of the tempest. Hawkeye and
Title:  his three companions withdrew a few paces to a shelter, and awaited the
Title:  issue with calmness that nothing but great practise could impart in such a
Title:  scene.
Title:  
Title:  It was not long before the reports of the rifles began to lose the echoes of
Title:  the woods, and to sound like weapons discharged in the open air. Then a
Title:  warrior appeared, here and there, driven to the skirts of the forest, and
Title:  rallying as he entered the clearing, as at the place where the final stand
Title:  was to be made. These were soon joined by others, until a long line of
Title:  swarthy figures was to be seen clinging to the cover with the obstinacy of
Title:  desperation. Heyward began to grow impatient, and turned his eyes anxiously
Title:  in the direction of Chingachgook. The chief was seated on a rock, with
Title:  nothing visible but his calm visage, considering the spectacle with an eye
Title:  as deliberate as if he were posted there merely to view the struggle.
Title:  
Title:  The time has come for the Delaware to strike'! said Duncan.
Title:  
Title:  Not so, not so, returned the scout; when he scents his friends, he will let
Title:  them know that he is here. See, see; the knaves are getting in that clump of
Title:  pines, like bees settling after their flight. By the Lord, a squaw might put
Title:  a bullet into the center of such a knot of dark skins!
Title:  
Title:  At that instant the whoop was given, and a dozen Hurons fell by a discharge
Title:  from Chingachgook and his band. The shout that followed was answered by a
Title:  single war-cry from the forest, and a yell passed through the air that
Title:  sounded as if a thousand throats were united in a common effort. The Hurons
Title:  staggered, deserting the center of their line, and Uncas issued from the
Title:  forest through the opening they left, at the head of a hundred warriors.
Title:  
Title:  Waving his hands right and left, the young chief pointed out the enemy to
Title:  his followers, who separated in pursuit. The war now divided, both wings of
Title:  the broken Hurons seeking protection in the woods again, hotly pressed by
Title:  the victorious warriors of the Lenape. A minute might have passed, but the
Title:  sounds were already receding in different directions, and gradually losing
Title:  their distinctness beneath the echoing arches of the woods. One little knot
Title:  of Hurons, however, had disdained to seek a cover, and were retiring, like
Title:  lions at bay, slowly and sullenly up the acclivity which Chingachgook and
Title:  his band had just deserted, to mingle more closely in the fray. Magua was
Title:  conspicuous in this party, both by his fierce and savage mien, and by the
Title:  air of haughty authority he yet maintained.
Title:  
Title:  In his eagerness to expedite the pursuit, Uncas had left himself nearly
Title:  alone; but the moment his eye caught the figure of Le Subtil, every other
Title:  consideration was forgotten. Raising his cry of battle, which recalled some
Title:  six or seven warriors, and reckless of the disparity of their numbers, he
Title:  rushed upon his enemy. Le Renard, who watched the movement, paused to
Title:  receive him with secret joy. But at the moment when he thought the rashness
Title:  of his impetuous young assailant had left him at his mercy, another shout
Title:  was given, and La Longue Carabine was seen rushing to the rescue, attended
Title:  by all his white associates. The Huron instantly turned, and commenced a
Title:  rapid retreat up the ascent.
Title:  
Title:  There was no time for greetings or congratulations; for Uncas, though
Title:  unconscious of the presence of his friends, continued the pursuit with the
Title:  velocity of the wind. In vain Hawkeye called to him to respect the covers;
Title:  the young Mohican braved the dangerous fire of his enemies, and soon
Title:  compelled them to a flight as swift as his own headlong speed. It was
Title:  fortunate that the race was of short continuance, and that the white men
Title:  were much favored by their position, or the Delaware would soon have
Title:  outstripped all his companions, and fallen a victim to his own temerity.
Title:  But, ere such a calamity could happen, the pursuers and pursued entered the
Title:  Wyandot village, within striking distance of each other.
Title:  
Title:  Excited by the presence of their dwellings, and tired of the chase, the
Title:  Hurons now made a stand, and fought around their council-lodge with the fury
Title:  of despair. The onset and the issue were like the passage and destruction of
Title:  a whirlwind. The tomahawk of Uncas, the blows of Hawkeye, and even the still
Title:  nervous arm of Munro were all busy for that passing moment, and the ground
Title:  was quickly strewed with their enemies. Still Magua, though daring and much
Title:  exposed, escaped from every effort against his life, with that sort of
Title:  fabled protection that was made to overlook the fortunes of favored heroes
Title:  in the legends of ancient poetry. Raising a yell that spoke volumes of anger
Title:  and disappointment, the subtle chief, when he saw his comrades fallen,
Title:  darted away from the place, attended by his two only surviving friends,
Title:  leaving the Delawares engaged in stripping the dead of the bloody trophies
Title:  of their victory.
Title:  
Title:  But Uncas, who had vainly sought him in the melee, bounded forward in
Title:  pursuit; Hawkeye, Heyward and David still pressing on his footsteps. The
Title:  utmost that the scout could effect, was to keep the muzzle of his rifle a
Title:  little in advance of his friend, to whom, however, it answered every purpose
Title:  of a charmed shield. Once Magua appeared disposed to make another and a
Title:  final effort to revenge his losses; but, abandoning his intention as soon as
Title:  demonstrated, he leaped into a thicket of bushes, through which he was
Title:  followed by his enemies, and suddenly entered the mouth of the cave already
Title:  known to the reader. Hawkeye, who had only forborne to fire in tenderness to
Title:  Uncas, raised a shout of success, and proclaimed aloud that now they were
Title:  certain of their game. The pursuers dashed into the long and narrow
Title:  entrance, in time to catch a glimpse of the retreating forms of the Hurons.
Title:  Their passage through the natural galleries and subterraneous apartments of
Title:  the cavern was preceded by the shrieks and cries of hundreds of women and
Title:  children. The place, seen by its dim and uncertain light, appeared like the
Title:  shades of the infernal regions, across which unhappy ghosts and savage
Title:  demons were flitting in multitudes.
Title:  
Title:  Still Uncas kept his eye on Magua, as if life to him possessed but a single
Title:  object. Heyward and the scout still pressed on his rear, actuated, though
Title:  possibly in a less degree, by a common feeling. But their way was becoming
Title:  intricate, in those dark and gloomy passages, and the glimpses of the
Title:  retiring warriors less distinct and frequent; and for a moment the trace was
Title:  believed to be lost, when a white robe was seen fluttering in the further
Title:  extremity of a passage that seemed to lead up the mountain.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis Cora! exclaimed Heyward, in a voice in which horror and delight were
Title:  wildly mingled.
Title:  
Title:  Cora! Cora! echoed Uncas, bounding forward like a deer.
Title:  
Title:  'Tis the maiden! shouted the scout. Courage, lady; we come! we come!
Title:  
Title:  The chase was renewed with a diligence rendered tenfold encouraging by this
Title:  glimpse of the captive. But the way was rugged, broken, and in spots nearly
Title:  impassable. Uncas abandoned his rifle, and leaped forward with headlong
Title:  precipitation. Heyward rashly imitated his example, though both were, a
Title:  moment afterward, admonished of his madness by hearing the bellowing of a
Title:  piece, that the Hurons found time to discharge down the passage in the
Title:  rocks, the bullet from which even gave the young Mohican a slight wound.
Title:  
Title:  We must close! said the scout, passing his friends by a desperate leap; the
Title:  knaves will pick us all off at this distance; and see, they hold the maiden
Title:  so as the shield themselves!
Title:  
Title:  Though his words were unheeded, or rather unheard, his example was followed
Title:  by his companions, who, by incredible exertions, got near enough to the
Title:  fugitives to perceive that Cora was borne along between the two warriors
Title:  while Magua prescribed the direction and manner of their flight. At this
Title:  moment the forms of all four were strongly drawn against an opening in the
Title:  sky, and they disappeared. Nearly frantic with disappointment, Uncas and
Title:  Heyward increased efforts that already seemed superhuman, and they issued
Title:  from the cavern on the side of the mountain, in time to note the route of
Title:  the pursued. The course lay up the ascent, and still continued hazardous and
Title:  laborious.
Title:  
Title:  Encumbered by his rifle, and, perhaps, not sustained by so deep an interest
Title:  in the captive as his companions, the scout suffered the latter to precede
Title:  him a little, Uncas, in his turn, taking the lead of Heyward. In this
Title:  manner, rocks, precipices and difficulties were surmounted in an incredibly
Title:  short space, that at another time, and under other circumstances, would have
Title:  been deemed almost insuperable. But the impetuous young man were rewarded by
Title:  finding that, encumbered with Cora, the Hurons were losing ground in the
Title:  race.
Title:  
Title:  Stay, dog of the Wyandots! exclaimed Uncas, shaking his bright tomahawk at
Title:  Magua; a Delaware girl calls stay!
Title:  
Title:  I will go no further! cried Cora, stopping unexpectedly on a ledge of rock,
Title:  that overhung a deep precipice, at no great distance from the summit of the
Title:  mountain. Kill me if thou wilt, detestable Huron; I will go no further.
Title:  
Title:  The supporters of the maiden raised their ready tomahawks with the impious
Title:  joy that fiends are thought to take in mischief, but Magua stayed the
Title:  uplifted arms. The Huron chief, after casting the weapons he had wrested
Title:  from his companions over the rock, drew his knife, and turned to his
Title:  captive, with a look in which conflicting passions fiercely contended.
Title:  
Title:  Woman, he said, chose; the wigwam or the knife of Le Subtil!
Title:  
Title:  Cora regarded him not, but dropping on her knees, she raised her eyes and
Title:  stretched her arms toward heaven, saying in a meek and yet confiding voice:
Title:  
Title:  I am thine; do with me as thou seest best!
Title:  
Title:  Woman, repeated Magua, hoarsely, and endeavoring in vain to catch a glance
Title:  from her serene and beaming eye, choose!
Title:  
Title:  But Cora neither heard nor heeded his demand. The form of the Huron trembled
Title:  in every fibre, and he raised his arm on high, but dropped it again with a
Title:  bewildered air, like one who doubted. Once more he struggled with himself
Title:  and lifted the keen weapon again; but just then a piercing cry was heard
Title:  above them, and Uncas appeared, leaping frantically, from a fearful height,
Title:  upon the ledge. Magua recoiled a step; and one of his assistants, profiting
Title:  by the chance, sheathed his own knife in the bosom of Cora.
Title:  
Title:  The Huron sprang like a tiger on his offending and already retreating
Title:  country man, but the falling form of Uncas separated the unnatural
Title:  combatants. Diverted from his object by this interruption, and maddened by
Title:  the murder he had just witnessed, Magua buried his weapon in the back of the
Title:  prostrate Delaware, uttering an unearthly shout as he committed the
Title:  dastardly deed. But Uncas arose from the blow, as the wounded panther turns
Title:  upon his foe, and struck the murderer of Cora to his feet, by an effort in
Title:  which the last of his failing strength was expended. Then, with a stern and
Title:  steady look, he turned to Le Subtil, and indicated by the expression of his
Title:  eye all that he would do had not the power deserted him. The latter seized
Title:  the nerveless arm of the unresisting Delaware, and passed his knife into his
Title:  bosom three several times, before his victim, still keeping his gaze riveted
Title:  on his enemy, with a look of inextinguishable scorn, feel dead at his feet.
Title:  
Title:  Mercy! mercy! Huron, cried Heyward, from above, in tones nearly choked by
Title:  horror; give mercy, and thou shalt receive from it!
Title:  
Title:  Whirling the bloody knife up at the imploring youth, the victorious Magua
Title:  uttered a cry so fierce, so wild, and yet so joyous, that it conveyed the
Title:  sounds of savage triumph to the ears of those who fought in the valley, a
Title:  thousand feet below. He was answered by a burst from the lips of the scout,
Title:  whose tall person was just then seen moving swiftly toward him, along those
Title:  dangerous crags, with steps as bold and reckless as if he possessed the
Title:  power to move in air. But when the hunter reached the scene of the ruthless
Title:  massacre, the ledge was tenanted only by the dead.
Title:  
Title:  His keen eye took a single look at the victims, and then shot its glances
Title:  over the difficulties of the ascent in his front. A form stood at the brow
Title:  of the mountain, on the very edge of the giddy height, with uplifted arms,
Title:  in an awful attitude of menace. Without stopping to consider his person, the
Title:  rifle of Hawkeye was raised; but a rock, which fell on the head of one of
Title:  the fugitives below, exposed the indignant and glowing countenance of the
Title:  honest Gamut. Then Magua issued from a crevice, and, stepping with calm
Title:  indifference over the body of the last of his associates, he leaped a wide
Title:  fissure, and ascended the rocks at a point where the arm of David could not
Title:  reach him. A single bound would carry him to the brow of the precipice, and
Title:  assure his safety. Before taking the leap, however, the Huron paused, and
Title:  shaking his hand at the scout, he shouted:
Title:  
Title:  The pale faces are dogs! the Delawares women! Magua leaves them on the
Title:  rocks, for the crows!
Title:  
Title:  Laughing hoarsely, he made a desperate leap, and fell short of his mark,
Title:  though his hands grasped a shrub on the verge of the height. The form of
Title:  Hawkeye had crouched like a beast about to take its spring, and his frame
Title:  trembled so violently with eagerness that the muzzle of the half-raised
Title:  rifle played like a leaf fluttering in the wind. Without exhausting himself
Title:  with fruitless efforts, the cunning Magua suffered his body to drop to the
Title:  length of his arms, and found a fragment for his feet to rest on. Then,
Title:  summoning all his powers, he renewed the attempt, and so far succeeded as to
Title:  draw his knees on the edge of the mountain. It was now, when the body of his
Title:  enemy was most collected together, that the agitated weapon of the scout was
Title:  drawn to his shoulder. The surrounding rocks themselves were not steadier
Title:  than the piece became, for the single instant that it poured out its
Title:  contents. The arms of the Huron relaxed, and his body fell back a little,
Title:  while his knees still kept their position. Turning a relentless look on his
Title:  enemy, he shook a hand in grim defiance. But his hold loosened, and his dark
Title:  person was seen cutting the air with its head downward, for a fleeting
Title:  instant, until it glided past the fringe of shrubbery which clung to the
Title:  mountain, in its rapid flight to destruction.
Title:  
Title:  -----------------------
Title:  
Title:  1 The American forest admits of the passage of horses, there being little
Title:  underbrush, and few tangled brakes. The plan of Hawkeye is the one which has
Title:  always proved the most successful in the battles between the whites and the
Title:  Indians. Wayne, in his celebrated campaign on the Miami, received the fire
Title:  of his enemies in line; and then causing his dragoons to wheel round his
Title:  flanks, the Indians were driven from their covers before they had time to
Title:  load. One of the most conspicuous of the chiefs who fought in the battle of
Title:  Miami assured the writer, that the red men could not fight the warriors with
Title:  long knives and leather stockings; meaning the dragoons with their sabers
Title:  and boots.
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:  Chapter 33
Title:  
Title:       They fought - like brave men, long and well,
Title:       They piled that ground with Moslem slain,
Title:       They conquered - but Bozzaris fell,
Title:       Bleeding at every vein.
Title:       His few surviving comrades saw
Title:       His smile when rang their loud hurrah,
Title:       And the red field was won;
Title:       Then saw in death his eyelids close
Title:       Calmly, as to a night's repose,
Title:       Like flowers at set of sun
Title:  
Title:                                                                 HALLECK
Title:  
Title:  The sun found the Lenape, on the succeeding day, a nation of mourners. The
Title:  sounds of the battle were over, and they had fed fat their ancient grudge,
Title:  and had avenged their recent quarrel with the Mengwe, by the destruction of
Title:  a whole community. The black and murky atmosphere that floated around the
Title:  spot where the Hurons had encamped, sufficiently announced of itself, the
Title:  fate of that wandering tribe; while hundreds of ravens, that struggled above
Title:  the summits of the mountains, or swept, in noisy flocks, across the wide
Title:  ranges of the woods, furnished a frightful direction to the scene of the
Title:  combat. In short, any eye at all practised in the signs of a frontier
Title:  warfare might easily have traced all those unerring evidences of the
Title:  ruthless results which attend an Indian vengeance.
Title:  
Title:  Still, the sun rose on the Lenape a nation of mourners. No shouts of
Title:  success, no songs of triumph, were heard, in rejoicings for their victory.
Title:  The latest straggler had returned from his fell employment, only to strip
Title:  himself of the terrific emblems of his bloody calling, and to join in the
Title:  lamentations of his countrymen, as a stricken people. Pride and exultation
Title:  were supplanted by humility, and the fiercest of human passions was already
Title:  succeeded by the most profound and unequivocal demonstrations of grief.
Title:  
Title:  The lodges were deserted; but a broad belt of earnest faces encircled a spot
Title:  in their vicinity, whither everything possessing life had repaired, and
Title:  where all were now collected, in deep and awful silence. Though beings of
Title:  every rank and age, of both sexes, and of all pursuits, had united to form
Title:  this breathing wall of bodies, they were influenced by a single emotion.
Title:  Each eye was riveted on the center of that ring, which contained the objects
Title:  of so much and of so common an interest.
Title:  
Title:  Six Delaware girls, with their long, dark, flowing tresses falling loosely
Title:  across their bosoms, stood apart, and only gave proof of their existence as
Title:  they occasionally strewed sweet-scented herbs and forest flowers on a litter
Title:  of fragrant plants that, under a pall of Indian robes, supported all that
Title:  now remained of the ardent, high-souled, and generous Cora. Her form was
Title:  concealed in many wrappers of the same simple manufacture, and her face was
Title:  shut forever from the gaze of men. At her feet was seated the desolate
Title:  Munro. His aged head was bowed nearly to the earth, in compelled submission
Title:  to the stroke of Providence; but a hidden anguish struggled about his
Title:  furrowed brow, that was only partially concealed by the careless locks of
Title:  gray that had fallen, neglected, on his temples. Gamut stood at his side,
Title:  his meek head bared to the rays of the sun, while his eyes, wandering and
Title:  concerned, seemed to be equally divided between that little volume, which
Title:  contained so many quaint but holy maxims, and the being in whose behalf his
Title:  soul yearned to administer consolation. Heyward was also nigh, supporting
Title:  himself against a tree, and endeavoring to keep down those sudden risings of
Title:  sorrow that it required his utmost manhood to subdue.
Title:  
Title:  But sad and melancholy as this group may easily be imagined, it was far less
Title:  touching than another, that occupied the opposite space of the same area.
Title:  Seated, as in life, with his form and limbs arranged in grave and decent
Title:  composure, Uncas appeared, arrayed in the most gorgeous ornaments that the
Title:  wealth of the tribe could furnish. Rich plumes nodded above his head;
Title:  wampum, gorgets, bracelets, and medals, adorned his person in profusion;
Title:  though his dull eye and vacant lineaments too strongly contradicted the idle
Title:  tale of pride they would convey.
Title:  
Title:  Directly in front of the corpse Chingachgook was placed, without arms, paint
Title:  or adornment of any sort, except the bright blue blazonry of his race, that
Title:  was indelibly impressed on his naked bosom. During the long period that the
Title:  tribe had thus been collected, the Mohican warrior had kept a steady,
Title:  anxious look on the cold and senseless countenance of his son. So riveted
Title:  and intense had been that gaze, and so changeless his attitude, that a
Title:  stranger might not have told the living from the dead, but for the
Title:  occasional gleamings of a troubled spirit, that shot athwart the dark visage
Title:  of one, and the deathlike calm that had forever settled on the lineaments of
Title:  the other. The scout was hard by, leaning in a pensive posture on his own
Title:  fatal and avenging weapon; while Tamenund, supported by the elders of his
Title:  nation, occupied a high place at hand, whence he might look down on the mute
Title:  and sorrowful assemblage of his people.
Title:  
Title:  Just within the inner edge of the circle stood a soldier, in the military
Title:  attire of a strange nation; and without it was his warhorse, in the center
Title:  of a collection of mounted domestics, seemingly in readiness to undertake
Title:  some distant journey. The vestments of the stranger announced him to be one
Title:  who held a responsible situation near the person of the captain of the
Title:  Canadas; and who, as it would now seem, finding his errand of peace
Title:  frustrated by the fierce impetuosity of his allies, was content to become a
Title:  silent and sad spectator of the fruits of a contest that he had arrived too
Title:  late to anticipate.
Title:  
Title:  The day was drawing to the close of its first quarter, and yet had the
Title:  multitude maintained its breathing stillness since its dawn.
Title:  
Title:  No sound louder than a stifled sob had been heard among them, nor had even a
Title:  limb been moved throughout that long and painful period, except to perform
Title:  the simple and touching offerings that were made, from time to time, in
Title:  commemoration of the dead. The patience and forbearance of Indian fortitude
Title:  could alone support such an appearance of abstraction, as seemed now to have
Title:  turned each dark and motionless figure into stone.
Title:  
Title:  At length, the sage of the Delawares stretched forth an arm, and leaning on
Title:  the shoulders of his attendants, he arose with an air as feeble as if
Title:  another age had already intervened between the man who had met his nation
Title:  the preceding day, and him who now tottered on his elevated stand.
Title:  
Title:  Men of the Lenape! he said, in low, hollow tones, that sounded like a voice
Title:  charged with some prophetic mission: the face of the Manitou is behind a
Title:  cloud! His eye is turned from you; His ears are shut; His tongue gives no
Title:  answer. You see him not; yet His judgments are before you. Let your hearts
Title:  be open and your spirits tell no lie. Men of the Lenape! the face of the
Title:  Manitou is behind a cloud.
Title:  
Title:  As this simple and yet terrible annunciation stole on the ears of the
Title:  multitude, a stillness as deep and awful succeeded as if the venerated
Title:  spirit they worshiped had uttered the words without the aid of human organs;
Title:  and even the inanimate Uncas appeared a being of life, compared with the
Title:  humbled and submissive throng by whom he was surrounded. As the immediate
Title:  effect, however, gradually passed away, a low murmur of voices commenced a
Title:  sort of chant in honor of the dead. The sounds were those of females, and
Title:  were thrillingly soft and wailing. The words were connected by no regular
Title:  continuation, but as one ceased another took up the eulogy, or lamentation,
Title:  whichever it might be called, and gave vent to her emotions in such language
Title:  as was suggested by her feelings and the occasion. At intervals the speaker
Title:  was interrupted by general and loud bursts of sorrow, during which the girls
Title:  around the bier of Cora plucked the plants and flowers blindly from her
Title:  body, as if bewildered with grief. But, in the milder moments of their
Title:  plaint, these emblems of purity and sweetness were cast back to their
Title:  places, with every sign of tenderness and regret. Though rendered less
Title:  connected by many and general interruptions and outbreakings, a translation
Title:  of their language would have contained a regular descant, which, in
Title:  substance, might have proved to possess a train of consecutive ideas.
Title:  
Title:  A girl, selected for the task by her rank and qualifications, commenced by
Title:  modest allusions to the qualities of the deceased warrior, embellishing her
Title:  expressions with those oriental images that the Indians have probably
Title:  brought with them from the extremes of the other continent, and which form
Title:  of themselves a link to connect the ancient histories of the two worlds. She
Title:  called him the panther of his tribe; and described him as one whose moccasin
Title:  left no trail on the dews; whose bound was like the leap of a young fawn;
Title:  whose eye was brighter than a star in the dark night; and whose voice, in
Title:  battle, was loud as the thunder of the Manitou. She reminded him of the
Title:  mother who bore him, and dwelt forcibly on the happiness she must feel in
Title:  possessing such a son. She bade him tell her, when they met in the world of
Title:  spirits, that the Delaware girls had shed tears above the grave of her
Title:  child, and had called her blessed.
Title:  
Title:  Then, they who succeeded, changing their tones to a milder and still more
Title:  tender strain, alluded, with the delicacy and sensitiveness of women, to the
Title:  stranger maiden, who had left the upper earth at a time so near his own
Title:  departure, as to render the will of the Great Spirit too manifest to be
Title:  disregarded. They admonished him to be kind to her, and to have
Title:  consideration for her ignorance of those arts which were so necessary to the
Title:  comfort of a warrior like himself. They dwelled upon her matchless beauty,
Title:  and on her noble resolution, without the taint of envy, and as angels may be
Title:  thought to delight in a superior excellence; adding, that these endowments
Title:  should prove more than equivalent for any little imperfection in her
Title:  education.
Title:  
Title:  After which, others again, in due succession, spoke to the maiden herself,
Title:  in the low, soft language of tenderness and love. They exhorted her to be of
Title:  cheerful mind, and to fear nothing for her future welfare. A hunter would be
Title:  her companion, who knew how to provide for her smallest wants; and a warrior
Title:  was at her side who was able to protect he against every danger. They
Title:  promised that her path should be pleasant, and her burden light. They
Title:  cautioned her against unavailing regrets for the friends of her youth, and
Title:  the scenes where her father had dwelt; assuring her that the blessed hunting
Title:  grounds of the Lenape, contained vales as pleasant, streams as pure; and
Title:  flowers as sweet, as the heaven of the pale faces. They advised her to be
Title:  attentive to the wants of her companion, and never to forget the distinction
Title:  which the Manitou had so wisely established between them. Then, in a wild
Title:  burst of their chant they sang with united voices the temper of the
Title:  Mohican's mind. They pronounced him noble, manly and generous; all that
Title:  became a warrior, and all that a maid might love. Clothing their ideas in
Title:  the most remote and subtle images, they betrayed, that, in the short period
Title:  of their intercourse, they had discovered, with the intuitive perception of
Title:  their sex, the truant disposition of his inclinations. The Delaware girls
Title:  had found no favor in his eyes! He was of a race that had once been lords on
Title:  the shores of the salt lake, and his wishes had led him back to a people who
Title:  dwelt about the graves of his fathers. Why should not such a predilection be
Title:  encouraged! That she was of a blood purer and richer than the rest of her
Title:  nation, any eye might have seen; that she was equal to the dangers and
Title:  daring of a life in the woods, her conduct had proved; and now, they added,
Title:  the wise one of the earth had transplanted her to a place where she would
Title:  find congenial spirits, and might be forever happy.
Title:  
Title:  Then, with another transition in voice and subject, allusions were made to
Title:  the virgin who wept in the adjacent lodge. They compared her to flakes of
Title:  snow; as pure, as white, as brilliant, and as liable to melt in the fierce
Title:  heats of summer, or congeal in the frosts of winter. They doubted not that
Title:  she was lovely in the eyes of the young chief, whose skin and whose sorrow
Title:  seemed so like her own; but though far from expressing such a preference, it
Title:  was evident they deemed her less excellent than the maid they mourned. Still
Title:  they denied her no need her rare charms might properly claim. Her ringlets
Title:  were compared to the exuberant tendrils of the vine, her eye to the blue
Title:  vault of heavens, and the most spotless cloud, with its glowing flush of the
Title:  sun, was admitted to be less attractive than her bloom.
Title:  
Title:  During these and similar songs nothing was audible but the murmurs of the
Title:  music; relieved, as it was, or rather rendered terrible, by those occasional
Title:  bursts of grief which might be called its choruses. The Delawares themselves
Title:  listened like charmed men; and it was very apparent, by the variations of
Title:  their speaking countenances, how deep and true was their sympathy. Even
Title:  David was not reluctant to lend his ears to the tones of voices so sweet;
Title:  and long ere the chant was ended, his gaze announced that his soul was
Title:  enthralled.
Title:  
Title:  The scout, to whom alone, of all the white men, the words were intelligible,
Title:  suffered himself to be a little aroused from his meditative posture, and
Title:  bent his face aside, to catch their meaning, as the girls proceeded. But
Title:  when they spoke of the future prospects of Cora and Uncas, he shook his
Title:  head, like one who knew the error of their simple creed, and resuming his
Title:  reclining attitude, he maintained it until the ceremony, if that might be
Title:  called a ceremony, in which feeling was so deeply imbued, was finished.
Title:  Happily for the self-command of both Heyward and Munro, they knew not the
Title:  meaning of the wild sounds they heard.
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook was a solitary exception to the interest manifested by the
Title:  native part of the audience. His look never changed throughout the whole of
Title:  the scene, nor did a muscle move in his rigid countenance, even at the
Title:  wildest or the most pathetic parts of the lamentation. The cold and
Title:  senseless remains of his son was all to him, and every other sense but that
Title:  of sight seemed frozen, in order that his eyes might take their final gaze
Title:  at those lineaments he had so long loved, and which were now about to be
Title:  closed forever from his view.
Title:  
Title:  In this stage of the obsequies, a warrior much renowned for deed in arms,
Title:  and more especially for services in the recent combat, a man of stern and
Title:  grave demeanor, advanced slowly from the crowd, and placed himself nigh the
Title:  person of the dead.
Title:  
Title:  Why hast thou left us, pride of the Wapanachki? he said, addressing himself
Title:  to the dull ears of Uncas, as if the empty clay retained the faculties of
Title:  the animated man; thy time has been like that of the sun when in the trees;
Title:  they glory brighter than his light at noonday. Thou art gone, youthful
Title:  warrior, but a hundred Wyandots are clearing the briers from thy path to the
Title:  world of the spirits. Who that saw thee in battle would believe that thou
Title:  couldst die? Who before thee has ever shown Uttawa the way into the fight?
Title:  Thy feet were like the wings of eagles; thine arm heavier than falling
Title:  branches from the pine; and thy voice like the Manitou when He speaks in the
Title:  clouds. The tongue of Uttawa is weak, he added, looking about him with a
Title:  melancholy gaze, and his heart exceeding heavy. Pride of the Wapanachki, why
Title:  hast thou left us?
Title:  
Title:  He was succeeded by others, in due order, until most of the high and gifted
Title:  men of the nation had sung or spoken their tribute of praise over the manes
Title:  of the deceased chief. When each had ended, another deep and breathing
Title:  silence reigned in all the place.
Title:  
Title:  Then a low, deep sound was heard, like the suppressed accompaniment of
Title:  distant music, rising just high enough on the air to be audible, and yet so
Title:  indistinctly, as to leave its character, and the place whence it proceeded,
Title:  alike matters of conjecture. It was, however, succeeded by another and
Title:  another strain, each in a higher key, until they grew on the ear, first in
Title:  long drawn and often repeated interjections, and finally in words. The lips
Title:  of Chingachgook had so far parted, as to announce that it was the monody of
Title:  the father. Though not an eye was turned toward him nor the smallest sign of
Title:  impatience exhibited, it was apparent, by the manner in which the multitude
Title:  elevated their heads to listen, that they drank in the sounds with an
Title:  intenseness of attention, that none but Tamenund himself had ever before
Title:  commanded. But they listened in vain. The strains rose just so loud as to
Title:  become intelligible, and then grew fainter and more trembling, until they
Title:  finally sank on the ear, as if borne away by a passing breath of wind. The
Title:  lips of the Sagamore closed, and he remained silent in his seat, looking
Title:  with his riveted eye and motionless form, like some creature that had been
Title:  turned from the Almighty hand with the form but without the spirit of a man.
Title:  The Delawares who knew by these symptoms that the mind of their friend was
Title:  not prepared for so mighty an effort of fortitude, relaxed in their
Title:  attention; and, with an innate delicacy, seemed to bestow all their thoughts
Title:  on the obsequies of the stranger maiden.
Title:  
Title:  A signal was given, by one of the elder chiefs, to the women who crowded
Title:  that part of the circle near which the body of Cora lay. Obedient to the
Title:  sign, the girls raised the bier to the elevation of their heads, and
Title:  advanced with slow and regulated steps, chanting, as they proceeded, another
Title:  wailing song in praise of the deceased. Gamut, who had been a close observer
Title:  of rites he deemed so heathenish, now bent his head over the shoulder of the
Title:  unconscious father, whispering:
Title:  
Title:  They move with the remains of thy child; shall we not follow, and see them
Title:  interred with Christian burial?
Title:  
Title:  Munro started, as if the last trumpet had sounded in his ear, and bestowing
Title:  one anxious and hurried glance around him, he arose and followed in the
Title:  simple train, with the mien of a soldier, but bearing the full burden of a
Title:  parent's suffering. His friends pressed around him with a sorrow that was
Title:  too strong to be termed sympathy - even the young Frenchman joining in the
Title:  procession, with the air of a man who was sensibly touched at the early and
Title:  melancholy fate of one so lovely. But when the last and humblest female of
Title:  the tribe had joined in the wild and yet ordered array, the men of the
Title:  Lenape contracted their circle, and formed again around the person of Uncas,
Title:  as silent, as grave, and as motionless as before.
Title:  
Title:  The place which had been chosen for the grave of Cora was a little knoll,
Title:  where a cluster of young and healthful pines had taken root, forming of
Title:  themselves a melancholy and appropriate shade over the spot. On reaching it
Title:  the girls deposited their burden, and continued for many minutes waiting,
Title:  with characteristic patience, and native timidity, for some evidence that
Title:  they whose feelings were most concerned were content with the arrangement.
Title:  At length the scout, who alone understood their habits, said, in their own
Title:  language:
Title:  
Title:  My daughters have done well; the white men thank them.
Title:  
Title:  Satisfied with this testimony in their favor, the girls proceeded to deposit
Title:  the body in a shell, ingeniously, and not inelegantly, fabricated of the
Title:  bark of the birch; after which they lowered it into its dark and final
Title:  abode. The ceremony of covering the remains, and concealing the marks of the
Title:  fresh earth, by leaves and other natural and customary objects, was
Title:  conducted with the same simple and silent forms. But when the labors of the
Title:  kind beings who had performed these sad and friendly offices were so far
Title:  completed, they hesitated, in a way to show that they knew not how much
Title:  further they might proceed. It was in this stage of the rites that the scout
Title:  again addressed them:
Title:  
Title:  My young women have done enough, he said: the spirit of the pale face has no
Title:  need of food or raiment, their gifts being according to the heaven of their
Title:  color. I see, he added, glancing an eye at David, who was preparing his book
Title:  in a manner that indicated an intention to lead the way in sacred song, that
Title:  one who better knows the Christian fashions is about to speak.
Title:  
Title:  The females stood modestly aside, and, from having been the principal actors
Title:  in the scene, they now became the meek and attentive observers of that which
Title:  followed. During the time David occupied in pouring out the pious feelings
Title:  of his spirit in this manner, not a sign of surprise, nor a look of
Title:  impatience, escaped them. They listened like those who knew the meaning of
Title:  the strange words, and appeared as if they felt the mingled emotions of
Title:  sorrow, hope, and resignation, they were intended to convey.
Title:  
Title:  Excited by the scene he had just witnessed, and perhaps influenced by his
Title:  own secret emotions, the master of song exceeded his usual efforts. His full
Title:  rich voice was not found to suffer by a comparison with the soft tones of
Title:  the girls; and his more modulated strains possessed, at least for the ears
Title:  of those to whom they were peculiarly addressed, the additional power of
Title:  intelligence. He ended the anthem, as he had commenced it, in the midst of a
Title:  grave and solemn stillness.
Title:  
Title:  When, however, the closing cadence had fallen on the ears of his auditors,
Title:  the secret, timorous glances of the eyes, and the general and yet subdued
Title:  movement of the assemblage, betrayed that something was expected from the
Title:  father of the deceased. Munro seemed sensible that the time was come for him
Title:  to exert what is, perhaps, the greatest effort of which human nature is
Title:  capable. He bared his gray locks, and looked around the timid and quiet
Title:  throng by which he was encircled, with a firm and collected countenance.
Title:  Then, motioning with his hand for the scout to listen, he said:
Title:  
Title:  Say to these kind and gentle females, that a heart-broken and failing man
Title:  returns them his thanks. Tell them, that the Being we all worship, under
Title:  different names, will be mindful of their charity; and that the time shall
Title:  not be distant when we may assemble around His throne without distinction of
Title:  sex, or rank, or color.
Title:  
Title:  The scout listened to the tremulous voice in which the veteran delivered
Title:  these words, and shook his head slowly when they were ended, as one who
Title:  doubted their efficacy.
Title:  
Title:  To tell them this, he said, would be to tell them that the snows come not in
Title:  the winter, or that the sun shines fiercest when the trees are stripped of
Title:  their leaves.
Title:  
Title:  Then turning to the women, he made such a communication of the other's
Title:  gratitude as he deemed most suited to the capacities of his listeners. The
Title:  head of Munro had already sunk upon his chest, and he was again fast
Title:  relapsing into melancholy, when the young Frenchman before named ventured to
Title:  touch him lightly on the elbow. As soon as he had gained the attention of
Title:  the mourning old man, he pointed toward a group of young Indians, who
Title:  approached with a light but closely covered litter, and then pointed upward
Title:  toward the sun.
Title:  
Title:  I understand you, sir, returned Munro, with a voice of forced firmness; I
Title:  understand you. It is the will of Heaven, and I submit. Cora, my child! if
Title:  the prayers of a heart-broken father could avail thee now, how blessed
Title:  shouldst thou be! Come, gentlemen, he added, looking about him with an air
Title:  of lofty composure, though the anguish that quivered in his faded
Title:  countenance was far too powerful to be concealed, our duty here is ended;
Title:  let us depart.
Title:  
Title:  Heyward gladly obeyed a summons that took them from a spot where, each
Title:  instant, he felt his self-control was about to desert him. While his
Title:  companions were mounting, however, he found time to press the hand of the
Title:  scout, and to repeat the terms of an engagement they had made to meet again
Title:  within the posts of the British army. Then, gladly throwing himself into the
Title:  saddle, he spurred his charger to the side of the litter, whence law and
Title:  stifled sobs alone announced the presence of Alice. In this manner, the head
Title:  of Munro again drooping on his bosom, with Heyward and David following in
Title:  sorrowing silence, and attended by the aid of Montcalm with his guard, all
Title:  the white men, with the exception of Hawkeye, passed from before the eyes of
Title:  the Delawares, and were buried in the vast forests of that region.
Title:  
Title:  But the tie which, through their common calamity, had united the feelings of
Title:  these simple dwellers in the woods with the strangers who had thus
Title:  transiently visited them, was not so easily broken. Years passed away before
Title:  the traditionary tale of the white maiden, and of the young warrior of the
Title:  Mohicans ceased to beguile the long nights and tedious marches, or to
Title:  animate their youthful and brave with a desire for vengeance. Neither were
Title:  the secondary actors in these momentous incidents forgotten. Through the
Title:  medium of the scout, who served for years afterward as a link between them
Title:  and civilized life, they learned, in answer to their inquiries, that the
Title:  Gray Head was speedily gathered to his fathers - borne down, as was
Title:  erroneously believed, by his military misfortunes; and that the Open Hand
Title:  had conveyed his surviving daughter far into the settlements of the pale
Title:  faces, where her tears had at last ceased to flow, and had been succeeded by
Title:  the bright smiles which were better suited to her joyous nature.
Title:  
Title:  But these were events of a time later than that which concerns our tale.
Title:  Deserted by all of his color, Hawkeye returned to the spot where his
Title:  sympathies led him, with a force that no ideal bond of union could destroy.
Title:  He was just in time to catch a parting look of the features of Uncas, whom
Title:  the Delawares were already inclosing in his last vestment of skins. They
Title:  paused to permit the longing and lingering gaze of the sturdy woodsman, and
Title:  when it was ended, the body was enveloped, never to be unclosed again. Then
Title:  came a procession like the other, and the whole nation was collected about
Title:  the temporary grave of the chief - temporary, because it was proper that, at
Title:  some future day, his bones should rest among those of this own people.
Title:  
Title:  The movement, like the feeling, had been simultaneous and general. The same
Title:  grave expression of grief, the same rigid silence, and the same deference to
Title:  the principal mourner, were observed around the place of interment as have
Title:  been already described. The body was deposited in an attitude of repose,
Title:  facing the rising sun, with the implements of war and of the chase at hand,
Title:  in readiness for the final journey. An opening was left in the shell, by
Title:  which it was protected from the soil, for the spirit to communicate with its
Title:  earthly tenement, when necessary; and the whole was concealed from the
Title:  instinct, and protected from the ravages of the beasts of prey, with an
Title:  ingenuity peculiar to the natives. The manual rites then ceased and all
Title:  present reverted to the more spiritual part of the ceremonies.
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook became once more the object of the common attention. He had not
Title:  yet spoken, and something consolatory and instructive was expected from so
Title:  renowned a chief on an occasion of such interest. Conscious of the wishes of
Title:  the people, the stern and self-restrained warrior raised his face, which had
Title:  latterly been buried in his robe, and looked about him with a steady eye.
Title:  His firmly compressed and expressive lips then severed, and for the first
Title:  time during the long ceremonies his voice was distinctly audible. Why do my
Title:  brothers mourn? he said, regarding the dark race of dejected warriors by
Title:  whom he was environed; why do my daughters weep? that a young man has gone
Title:  to the happy hunting-grounds; that a chief has filled his time with honor?
Title:  He was good; he was dutiful; he was brave. Who can deny it? The Manitou had
Title:  need of such a warrior, and He has called him away. As for me, the son and
Title:  the father of Uncas, I am a blazed pine, in a clearing of the pale faces. My
Title:  race has gone from the shores of the salt lake and the hills of the
Title:  Delawares. But who can say that the serpent of his tribe has forgotten his
Title:  wisdom? I am alone - -
Title:  
Title:  No, no, cried Hawkeye, who had been gazing with a yearning look at the rigid
Title:  features of his friend, with something like his own self-command, but whose
Title:  philosophy could endure no longer; no, Sagamore, not alone. The gifts of our
Title:  colors may be different, but God has so placed us as to journey in the same
Title:  path. I have no kin, and I may also say, like you, no people. He was your
Title:  son, and a red-skin by nature; and it may be that your blood was nearer -
Title:  but, if ever I forget the lad who has so often fou't at my side in war, and
Title:  slept at my side in peace, may He who made us all, whatever may be our color
Title:  or our gifts, forget me! The boy has left us for a time; but, Sagamore, you
Title:  are not alone.
Title:  
Title:  Chingachgook grasped the hand that, in the warmth of feeling, the scout had
Title:  stretched across the fresh earth, and in an attitude of friendship these two
Title:  sturdy and intrepid woodsmen bowed their heads together, while scalding
Title:  tears fell to their feet, watering the grave of Uncas like drops of falling
Title:  rain.
Title:  
Title:  In the midst of the awful stillness with which such a burst of feeling,
Title:  coming as it did, from the two most renowned warriors of that region, was
Title:  received, Tamenund lifted his voice to disperse the multitude.
Title:  
Title:  It is enough, he said. Go, children of the Lenape, the anger of the Manitou
Title:  is not done. Why should Tamenund stay? The pale faces are masters of the
Title:  earth, and the time of the red men has not yet come again. My day has been
Title:  too long. In the morning I saw the sons of Unamis happy and strong; and yet,
Title:  before the night has come, have I lived to see the last warrior of the wise
Title:  race of the Mohicans.
Title:  
Title:                                     FINIS
Title:  
Title:                 ----------------------------------------------
Title:  
Title:                            [ Contents ] [ Fiction ]
