Title:  Title:  Moby Dick; or The Whale
Title:  
Title:  Author:  Herman Melville
Title:  
Title:  June, 2001  [Etext #2701]
Title:  
Title:  This etext was prepared by Daniel Lazarus and Jonesey
Title:  
Title:  Notes on this etext of Moby Dick:
Title:  
Title:  This text is a combination of etexts, one from the now-defunct ERIS
Title:  project at Virginia Tech and one from Project Gutenberg's archives.
Title:  The proofreaders of this version are indebted to The University of
Title:  Adelaide Library for preserving the Virginia Tech version.  The
Title:  resulting etext was compared with a public domain hard copy version of
Title:  the text.
Title:  
Title:  In chapters 24, 89, and 90, we substituted a capital L for the symbol
Title:  for the British pound, a unit of currency.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  MOBY DICK; OR THE WHALE 
Title:  
Title:  by Herman Melville
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 1
Title:  
Title:  Loomings.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Call me Ishmael.  Some years ago--never mind how long
Title:  precisely--having little or no money in my purse, and nothing
Title:  particular to interest me on shore, I thought I would sail about a
Title:  little and see the watery part of the world.  It is a way I have of
Title:  driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.  Whenever I
Title:  find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a damp,
Title:  drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily
Title:  pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of every
Title:  funeral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper
Title:  hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me
Title:  from deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knocking
Title:  people's hats off--then, I account it high time to get to sea as soon
Title:  as I can.  This is my substitute for pistol and ball.  With a
Title:  philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword; I quietly
Title:  take to the ship.  There is nothing surprising in this.  If they but
Title:  knew it, almost all men in their degree, some time or other, cherish
Title:  very nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me.
Title:  
Title:  There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by
Title:  wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs--commerce surrounds it with
Title:  her surf.  Right and left, the streets take you waterward.  Its
Title:  extreme downtown is the battery, where that noble mole is washed by
Title:  waves, and cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of
Title:  sight of land.  Look at the crowds of water-gazers there.
Title:  
Title:  Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon.  Go from
Title:  Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall,
Title:  northward.  What do you see?--Posted like silent sentinels all around
Title:  the town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean
Title:  reveries.  Some leaning against the spiles; some seated upon the
Title:  pier-heads; some looking over the bulwarks of ships from China; some
Title:  high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a still better
Title:  seaward peep.  But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up in
Title:  lath and plaster--tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to
Title:  desks.  How then is this?  Are the green fields gone?  What do they
Title:  here?
Title:  
Title:  But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and
Title:  seemingly bound for a dive.  Strange!  Nothing will content them but
Title:  the extremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady lee of
Title:  yonder warehouses will not suffice.  No.  They must get just as nigh
Title:  the water as they possibly can without falling in.  And there they
Title:  stand--miles of them--leagues.  Inlanders all, they come from lanes
Title:  and alleys, streets and avenues--north, east, south, and west.  Yet
Title:  here they all unite.  Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the
Title:  needles of the compasses of all those ships attract them thither?
Title:  
Title:  Once more.  Say you are in the country; in some high land of lakes.
Title:  Take almost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you down
Title:  in a dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream.  There is
Title:  magic in it.  Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his
Title:  deepest reveries--stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going,
Title:  and he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in all
Title:  that region.  Should you ever be athirst in the great American
Title:  desert, try this experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied
Title:  with a metaphysical professor.  Yes, as every one knows, meditation
Title:  and water are wedded for ever.
Title:  
Title:  But here is an artist.  He desires to paint you the dreamiest,
Title:  shadiest, quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all
Title:  the valley of the Saco.  What is the chief element he employs?  There
Title:  stand his trees, each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a
Title:  crucifix were within; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep his
Title:  cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy smoke.  Deep into
Title:  distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping spurs of
Title:  mountains bathed in their hill-side blue.  But though the picture
Title:  lies thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs
Title:  like leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were vain, unless the
Title:  shepherd's eye were fixed upon the magic stream before him.  Go visit
Title:  the Prairies in June, when for scores on scores of miles you wade
Title:  knee-deep among Tiger-lilies--what is the one charm
Title:  wanting?--Water--there is not a drop of water there!  Were Niagara
Title:  but a cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see
Title:  it?  Why did the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two
Title:  handfuls of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he
Title:  sadly needed, or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway
Title:  Beach?  Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthy
Title:  soul in him, at some time or other crazy to go to sea?  Why upon your
Title:  first voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel such a mystical
Title:  vibration, when first told that you and your ship were now out of
Title:  sight of land?  Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy?  Why did
Title:  the Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove?  Surely
Title:  all this is not without meaning.  And still deeper the meaning of
Title:  that story of Narcissus, who because he could not grasp the
Title:  tormenting, mild image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and
Title:  was drowned.  But that same image, we ourselves see in all rivers and
Title:  oceans.  It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life; and this
Title:  is the key to it all.
Title:  
Title:  Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I
Title:  begin to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of
Title:  my lungs, I do not mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as
Title:  a passenger.  For to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse,
Title:  and a purse is but a rag unless you have something in it.  Besides,
Title:  passengers get sea-sick--grow quarrelsome--don't sleep of nights--do
Title:  not enjoy themselves much, as a general thing;--no, I never go as a
Title:  passenger; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea
Title:  as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook.  I abandon the glory and
Title:  distinction of such offices to those who like them.  For my part, I
Title:  abominate all honourable respectable toils, trials, and tribulations
Title:  of every kind whatsoever.  It is quite as much as I can do to take
Title:  care of myself, without taking care of ships, barques, brigs,
Title:  schooners, and what not.  And as for going as cook,--though I confess
Title:  there is considerable glory in that, a cook being a sort of officer
Title:  on ship-board--yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling fowls;--though
Title:  once broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and
Title:  peppered, there is no one who will speak more respectfully, not to
Title:  say reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will.  It is out of the
Title:  idolatrous dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted
Title:  river horse, that you see the mummies of those creatures in their
Title:  huge bake-houses the pyramids.
Title:  
Title:  No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast,
Title:  plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal mast-head.
Title:  True, they rather order me about some, and make me jump from spar to
Title:  spar, like a grasshopper in a May meadow.  And at first, this sort of
Title:  thing is unpleasant enough.  It touches one's sense of honour,
Title:  particularly if you come of an old established family in the land,
Title:  the Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or Hardicanutes.  And more than
Title:  all, if just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you have
Title:  been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest boys
Title:  stand in awe of you.  The transition is a keen one, I assure you,
Title:  from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of
Title:  Seneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it.  But even
Title:  this wears off in time.
Title:  
Title:  What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a
Title:  broom and sweep down the decks?  What does that indignity amount to,
Title:  weighed, I mean, in the scales of the New Testament?  Do you think
Title:  the archangel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because I
Title:  promptly and respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular
Title:  instance?  Who ain't a slave?  Tell me that.  Well, then, however the
Title:  old sea-captains may order me about--however they may thump and punch
Title:  me about, I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right;
Title:  that everybody else is one way or other served in much the same
Title:  way--either in a physical or metaphysical point of view, that is; and
Title:  so the universal thump is passed round, and all hands should rub each
Title:  other's shoulder-blades, and be content.
Title:  
Title:  Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of
Title:  paying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single
Title:  penny that I ever heard of.  On the contrary, passengers themselves
Title:  must pay.  And there is all the difference in the world between
Title:  paying and being paid.  The act of paying is perhaps the most
Title:  uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed upon
Title:  us.  But BEING PAID,--what will compare with it?  The urbane activity
Title:  with which a man receives money is really marvellous, considering
Title:  that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly
Title:  ills, and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven.  Ah! how
Title:  cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition!
Title:  
Title:  Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome
Title:  exercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck.  For as in this world,
Title:  head winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if
Title:  you never violate the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the
Title:  Commodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand from
Title:  the sailors on the forecastle.  He thinks he breathes it first; but
Title:  not so.  In much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in
Title:  many other things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect
Title:  it.  But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea
Title:  as a merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on a
Title:  whaling voyage; this the invisible police officer of the Fates, who
Title:  has the constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and
Title:  influences me in some unaccountable way--he can better answer than
Title:  any one else.  And, doubtless, my going on this whaling voyage,
Title:  formed part of the grand programme of Providence that was drawn up a
Title:  long time ago.  It came in as a sort of brief interlude and solo
Title:  between more extensive performances.  I take it that this part of the
Title:  bill must have run something like this:
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "GRAND CONTESTED ELECTION FOR THE PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED STATES.
Title:  "WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL.
Title:  "BLOODY BATTLE IN AFFGHANISTAN."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers,
Title:  the Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when
Title:  others were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and
Title:  short and easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in
Title:  farces--though I cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that I
Title:  recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a little into the
Title:  springs and motives which being cunningly presented to me under
Title:  various disguises, induced me to set about performing the part I did,
Title:  besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was a choice resulting
Title:  from my own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment.
Title:  
Title:  Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great
Title:  whale himself.  Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all
Title:  my curiosity.  Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his
Title:  island bulk; the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these,
Title:  with all the attending marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and
Title:  sounds, helped to sway me to my wish.  With other men, perhaps, such
Title:  things would not have been inducements; but as for me, I am tormented
Title:  with an everlasting itch for things remote.  I love to sail forbidden
Title:  seas, and land on barbarous coasts.  Not ignoring what is good, I am
Title:  quick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with it--would
Title:  they let me--since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all
Title:  the inmates of the place one lodges in.
Title:  
Title:  By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the
Title:  great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild
Title:  conceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into
Title:  my inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of
Title:  them all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 2
Title:  
Title:  The Carpet-Bag.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my
Title:  arm, and started for Cape Horn and the Pacific.  Quitting the good
Title:  city of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New Bedford.  It was a
Title:  Saturday night in December.  Much was I disappointed upon learning
Title:  that the little packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and that no
Title:  way of reaching that place would offer, till the following Monday.
Title:  
Title:  As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop
Title:  at this same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as
Title:  well be related that I, for one, had no idea of so doing.  For my
Title:  mind was made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft, because
Title:  there was a fine, boisterous something about everything connected
Title:  with that famous old island, which amazingly pleased me.  Besides
Title:  though New Bedford has of late been gradually monopolising the
Title:  business of whaling, and though in this matter poor old Nantucket is
Title:  now much behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original--the Tyre
Title:  of this Carthage;--the place where the first dead American whale was
Title:  stranded.  Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal
Title:  whalemen, the Red-Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to the
Title:  Leviathan?  And where but from Nantucket, too, did that first
Title:  adventurous little sloop put forth, partly laden with imported
Title:  cobblestones--so goes the story--to throw at the whales, in order to
Title:  discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from the
Title:  bowsprit?
Title:  
Title:  Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before
Title:  me in New Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it
Title:  became a matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleep
Title:  meanwhile.  It was a very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and
Title:  dismal night, bitingly cold and cheerless.  I knew no one in the
Title:  place.  With anxious grapnels I had sounded my pocket, and only
Title:  brought up a few pieces of silver,--So, wherever you go, Ishmael,
Title:  said I to myself, as I stood in the middle of a dreary street
Title:  shouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom towards the north with
Title:  the darkness towards the south--wherever in your wisdom you may
Title:  conclude to lodge for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to inquire
Title:  the price, and don't be too particular.
Title:  
Title:  With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of "The
Title:  Crossed Harpoons"--but it looked too expensive and jolly there.
Title:  Further on, from the bright red windows of the "Sword-Fish Inn,"
Title:  there came such fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted the
Title:  packed snow and ice from before the house, for everywhere else the
Title:  congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic
Title:  pavement,--rather weary for me, when I struck my foot against the
Title:  flinty projections, because from hard, remorseless service the soles
Title:  of my boots were in a most miserable plight.  Too expensive and
Title:  jolly, again thought I, pausing one moment to watch the broad glare
Title:  in the street, and hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses within.
Title:  But go on, Ishmael, said I at last; don't you hear? get away from
Title:  before the door; your patched boots are stopping the way.  So on I
Title:  went.  I now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward,
Title:  for there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if not the cheeriest inns.
Title:  
Title:  Such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either
Title:  hand, and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a
Title:  tomb.  At this hour of the night, of the last day of the week, that
Title:  quarter of the town proved all but deserted.  But presently I came to
Title:  a smoky light proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of which
Title:  stood invitingly open.  It had a careless look, as if it were meant
Title:  for the uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I did was
Title:  to stumble over an ash-box in the porch.  Ha! thought I, ha, as the
Title:  flying particles almost choked me, are these ashes from that
Title:  destroyed city, Gomorrah?  But "The Crossed Harpoons," and "The
Title:  Sword-Fish?"--this, then must needs be the sign of "The Trap."
Title:  However, I picked myself up and hearing a loud voice within, pushed
Title:  on and opened a second, interior door.
Title:  
Title:  It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet.  A hundred
Title:  black faces turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black
Title:  Angel of Doom was beating a book in a pulpit.  It was a negro church;
Title:  and the preacher's text was about the blackness of darkness, and the
Title:  weeping and wailing and teeth-gnashing there.  Ha, Ishmael, muttered
Title:  I, backing out, Wretched entertainment at the sign of 'The Trap!'
Title:  
Title:  Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the
Title:  docks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a
Title:  swinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintly
Title:  representing a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words
Title:  underneath--"The Spouter Inn:--Peter Coffin."
Title:  
Title:  Coffin?--Spouter?--Rather ominous in that particular connexion,
Title:  thought I.  But it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I
Title:  suppose this Peter here is an emigrant from there.  As the light
Title:  looked so dim, and the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and
Title:  the dilapidated little wooden house itself looked as if it might have
Title:  been carted here from the ruins of some burnt district, and as the
Title:  swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, I thought
Title:  that here was the very spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea
Title:  coffee.
Title:  
Title:  It was a queer sort of place--a gable-ended old house, one side
Title:  palsied as it were, and leaning over sadly.  It stood on a sharp
Title:  bleak corner, where that tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse
Title:  howling than ever it did about poor Paul's tossed craft.  Euroclydon,
Title:  nevertheless, is a mighty pleasant zephyr to any one in-doors, with
Title:  his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed.  "In judging of that
Title:  tempestuous wind called Euroclydon," says an old writer--of whose
Title:  works I possess the only copy extant--"it maketh a marvellous
Title:  difference, whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where
Title:  the frost is all on the outside, or whether thou observest it from
Title:  that sashless window, where the frost is on both sides, and of which
Title:  the wight Death is the only glazier."  True enough, thought I, as
Title:  this passage occurred to my mind--old black-letter, thou reasonest
Title:  well.  Yes, these eyes are windows, and this body of mine is the
Title:  house.  What a pity they didn't stop up the chinks and the crannies
Title:  though, and thrust in a little lint here and there.  But it's too
Title:  late to make any improvements now.  The universe is finished; the
Title:  copestone is on, and the chips were carted off a million years ago.
Title:  Poor Lazarus there, chattering his teeth against the curbstone for
Title:  his pillow, and shaking off his tatters with his shiverings, he might
Title:  plug up both ears with rags, and put a corn-cob into his mouth, and
Title:  yet that would not keep out the tempestuous Euroclydon.  Euroclydon!
Title:  says old Dives, in his red silken wrapper--(he had a redder one
Title:  afterwards) pooh, pooh!  What a fine frosty night; how Orion
Title:  glitters; what northern lights!  Let them talk of their oriental
Title:  summer climes of everlasting conservatories; give me the privilege of
Title:  making my own summer with my own coals.
Title:  
Title:  But what thinks Lazarus?  Can he warm his blue hands by holding them
Title:  up to the grand northern lights?  Would not Lazarus rather be in
Title:  Sumatra than here?  Would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise
Title:  along the line of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pit
Title:  itself, in order to keep out this frost?
Title:  
Title:  Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before
Title:  the door of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should
Title:  be moored to one of the Moluccas.  Yet Dives himself, he too lives
Title:  like a Czar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs, and being a
Title:  president of a temperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears of
Title:  orphans.
Title:  
Title:  But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there
Title:  is plenty of that yet to come.  Let us scrape the ice from our
Title:  frosted feet, and see what sort of a place this "Spouter" may be.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 3
Title:  
Title:  The Spouter-Inn.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Entering that gable-ended Spouter-Inn, you found yourself in a wide,
Title:  low, straggling entry with old-fashioned wainscots, reminding one of
Title:  the bulwarks of some condemned old craft.  On one side hung a very
Title:  large oilpainting so thoroughly besmoked, and every way defaced,
Title:  that in the unequal crosslights by which you viewed it, it was only
Title:  by diligent study and a series of systematic visits to it, and
Title:  careful inquiry of the neighbors, that you could any way arrive at an
Title:  understanding of its purpose.  Such unaccountable masses of shades
Title:  and shadows, that at first you almost thought some ambitious young
Title:  artist, in the time of the New England hags, had endeavored to
Title:  delineate chaos bewitched.  But by dint of much and earnest
Title:  contemplation, and oft repeated ponderings, and especially by
Title:  throwing open the little window towards the back of the entry, you at
Title:  last come to the conclusion that such an idea, however wild, might
Title:  not be altogether unwarranted.
Title:  
Title:  But what most puzzled and confounded you was a long, limber,
Title:  portentous, black mass of something hovering in the centre of the
Title:  picture over three blue, dim, perpendicular lines floating in a
Title:  nameless yeast.  A boggy, soggy, squitchy picture truly, enough to
Title:  drive a nervous man distracted.  Yet was there a sort of indefinite,
Title:  half-attained, unimaginable sublimity about it that fairly froze you
Title:  to it, till you involuntarily took an oath with yourself to find out
Title:  what that marvellous painting meant.  Ever and anon a bright, but,
Title:  alas, deceptive idea would dart you through.--It's the Black Sea in a
Title:  midnight gale.--It's the unnatural combat of the four primal
Title:  elements.--It's a blasted heath.--It's a Hyperborean winter
Title:  scene.--It's the breaking-up of the icebound stream of Time.  But at
Title:  last all these fancies yielded to that one portentous something in
Title:  the picture's midst.  THAT once found out, and all the rest were
Title:  plain.  But stop; does it not bear a faint resemblance to a gigantic
Title:  fish? even the great leviathan himself?
Title:  
Title:  In fact, the artist's design seemed this: a final theory of my own,
Title:  partly based upon the aggregated opinions of many aged persons with
Title:  whom I conversed upon the subject.  The picture represents a
Title:  Cape-Horner in a great hurricane; the half-foundered ship weltering
Title:  there with its three dismantled masts alone visible; and an
Title:  exasperated whale, purposing to spring clean over the craft, is in
Title:  the enormous act of impaling himself upon the three mast-heads.
Title:  
Title:  The opposite wall of this entry was hung all over with a heathenish
Title:  array of monstrous clubs and spears.  Some were thickly set with
Title:  glittering teeth resembling ivory saws; others were tufted with knots
Title:  of human hair; and one was sickle-shaped, with a vast handle sweeping
Title:  round like the segment made in the new-mown grass by a long-armed
Title:  mower.  You shuddered as you gazed, and wondered what monstrous
Title:  cannibal and savage could ever have gone a death-harvesting with such
Title:  a hacking, horrifying implement.  Mixed with these were rusty old
Title:  whaling lances and harpoons all broken and deformed.  Some were
Title:  storied weapons.  With this once long lance, now wildly elbowed,
Title:  fifty years ago did Nathan Swain kill fifteen whales between a
Title:  sunrise and a sunset.  And that harpoon--so like a corkscrew now--was
Title:  flung in Javan seas, and run away with by a whale, years afterwards
Title:  slain off the Cape of Blanco.  The original iron entered nigh the
Title:  tail, and, like a restless needle sojourning in the body of a man,
Title:  travelled full forty feet, and at last was found imbedded in the
Title:  hump.
Title:  
Title:  Crossing this dusky entry, and on through yon low-arched way--cut
Title:  through what in old times must have been a great central chimney with
Title:  fireplaces all round--you enter the public room.  A still duskier
Title:  place is this, with such low ponderous beams above, and such old
Title:  wrinkled planks beneath, that you would almost fancy you trod some
Title:  old craft's cockpits, especially of such a howling night, when this
Title:  corner-anchored old ark rocked so furiously.  On one side stood a
Title:  long, low, shelf-like table covered with cracked glass cases, filled
Title:  with dusty rarities gathered from this wide world's remotest nooks.
Title:  Projecting from the further angle of the room stands a dark-looking
Title:  den--the bar--a rude attempt at a right whale's head.  Be that how it
Title:  may, there stands the vast arched bone of the whale's jaw, so wide, a
Title:  coach might almost drive beneath it.  Within are shabby shelves,
Title:  ranged round with old decanters, bottles, flasks; and in those jaws
Title:  of swift destruction, like another cursed Jonah (by which name indeed
Title:  they called him), bustles a little withered old man, who, for their
Title:  money, dearly sells the sailors deliriums and death.
Title:  
Title:  Abominable are the tumblers into which he pours his poison.  Though
Title:  true cylinders without--within, the villanous green goggling glasses
Title:  deceitfully tapered downwards to a cheating bottom.  Parallel
Title:  meridians rudely pecked into the glass, surround these footpads'
Title:  goblets.  Fill to THIS mark, and your charge is but a penny; to THIS
Title:  a penny more; and so on to the full glass--the Cape Horn measure,
Title:  which you may gulp down for a shilling.
Title:  
Title:  Upon entering the place I found a number of young seamen gathered
Title:  about a table, examining by a dim light divers specimens of
Title:  SKRIMSHANDER.  I sought the landlord, and telling him I desired to be
Title:  accommodated with a room, received for answer that his house was
Title:  full--not a bed unoccupied.  "But avast," he added, tapping his
Title:  forehead, "you haint no objections to sharing a harpooneer's blanket,
Title:  have ye?  I s'pose you are goin' a-whalin', so you'd better get used
Title:  to that sort of thing."
Title:  
Title:  I told him that I never liked to sleep two in a bed; that if I should
Title:  ever do so, it would depend upon who the harpooneer might be, and
Title:  that if he (the landlord) really had no other place for me, and the
Title:  harpooneer was not decidedly objectionable, why rather than wander
Title:  further about a strange town on so bitter a night, I would put up
Title:  with the half of any decent man's blanket.
Title:  
Title:  "I thought so.  All right; take a seat.  Supper?--you want supper?
Title:  Supper'll be ready directly."
Title:  
Title:  I sat down on an old wooden settle, carved all over like a bench on
Title:  the Battery.  At one end a ruminating tar was still further adorning
Title:  it with his jack-knife, stooping over and diligently working away at
Title:  the space between his legs.  He was trying his hand at a ship under
Title:  full sail, but he didn't make much headway, I thought.
Title:  
Title:  At last some four or five of us were summoned to our meal in an
Title:  adjoining room.  It was cold as Iceland--no fire at all--the landlord
Title:  said he couldn't afford it.  Nothing but two dismal tallow candles,
Title:  each in a winding sheet.  We were fain to button up our monkey
Title:  jackets, and hold to our lips cups of scalding tea with our half
Title:  frozen fingers.  But the fare was of the most substantial kind--not
Title:  only meat and potatoes, but dumplings; good heavens! dumplings for
Title:  supper!  One young fellow in a green box coat, addressed himself to
Title:  these dumplings in a most direful manner.
Title:  
Title:  "My boy," said the landlord, "you'll have the nightmare to a dead
Title:  sartainty."
Title:  
Title:  "Landlord," I whispered, "that aint the harpooneer is it?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, no," said he, looking a sort of diabolically funny, "the
Title:  harpooneer is a dark complexioned chap.  He never eats dumplings, he
Title:  don't--he eats nothing but steaks, and he likes 'em rare."
Title:  
Title:  "The devil he does," says I.  "Where is that harpooneer?  Is he
Title:  here?"
Title:  
Title:  "He'll be here afore long," was the answer.
Title:  
Title:  I could not help it, but I began to feel suspicious of this "dark
Title:  complexioned" harpooneer.  At any rate, I made up my mind that if it
Title:  so turned out that we should sleep together, he must undress and get
Title:  into bed before I did.
Title:  
Title:  Supper over, the company went back to the bar-room, when, knowing not
Title:  what else to do with myself, I resolved to spend the rest of the
Title:  evening as a looker on.
Title:  
Title:  Presently a rioting noise was heard without.  Starting up, the
Title:  landlord cried, "That's the Grampus's crew.  I seed her reported in
Title:  the offing this morning; a three years' voyage, and a full ship.
Title:  Hurrah, boys; now we'll have the latest news from the Feegees."
Title:  
Title:  A tramping of sea boots was heard in the entry; the door was flung
Title:  open, and in rolled a wild set of mariners enough.  Enveloped in
Title:  their shaggy watch coats, and with their heads muffled in woollen
Title:  comforters, all bedarned and ragged, and their beards stiff with
Title:  icicles, they seemed an eruption of bears from Labrador.  They had
Title:  just landed from their boat, and this was the first house they
Title:  entered.  No wonder, then, that they made a straight wake for the
Title:  whale's mouth--the bar--when the wrinkled little old Jonah, there
Title:  officiating, soon poured them out brimmers all round.  One complained
Title:  of a bad cold in his head, upon which Jonah mixed him a pitch-like
Title:  potion of gin and molasses, which he swore was a sovereign cure for
Title:  all colds and catarrhs whatsoever, never mind of how long standing,
Title:  or whether caught off the coast of Labrador, or on the weather side
Title:  of an ice-island.
Title:  
Title:  The liquor soon mounted into their heads, as it generally does even
Title:  with the arrantest topers newly landed from sea, and they began
Title:  capering about most obstreperously.
Title:  
Title:  I observed, however, that one of them held somewhat aloof, and though
Title:  he seemed desirous not to spoil the hilarity of his shipmates by his
Title:  own sober face, yet upon the whole he refrained from making as much
Title:  noise as the rest.  This man interested me at once; and since the
Title:  sea-gods had ordained that he should soon become my shipmate (though
Title:  but a sleeping-partner one, so far as this narrative is concerned),
Title:  I will here venture upon a little description of him.  He stood full
Title:  six feet in height, with noble shoulders, and a chest like a
Title:  coffer-dam.  I have seldom seen such brawn in a man.  His face was
Title:  deeply brown and burnt, making his white teeth dazzling by the
Title:  contrast; while in the deep shadows of his eyes floated some
Title:  reminiscences that did not seem to give him much joy.  His voice at
Title:  once announced that he was a Southerner, and from his fine stature, I
Title:  thought he must be one of those tall mountaineers from the
Title:  Alleghanian Ridge in Virginia.  When the revelry of his companions
Title:  had mounted to its height, this man slipped away unobserved, and I
Title:  saw no more of him till he became my comrade on the sea.  In a few
Title:  minutes, however, he was missed by his shipmates, and being, it
Title:  seems, for some reason a huge favourite with them, they raised a cry
Title:  of "Bulkington!  Bulkington! where's Bulkington?" and darted out of
Title:  the house in pursuit of him.
Title:  
Title:  It was now about nine o'clock, and the room seeming almost
Title:  supernaturally quiet after these orgies, I began to congratulate
Title:  myself upon a little plan that had occurred to me just previous to
Title:  the entrance of the seamen.
Title:  
Title:  No man prefers to sleep two in a bed.  In fact, you would a good deal
Title:  rather not sleep with your own brother.  I don't know how it is, but
Title:  people like to be private when they are sleeping.  And when it comes
Title:  to sleeping with an unknown stranger, in a strange inn, in a strange
Title:  town, and that stranger a harpooneer, then your objections
Title:  indefinitely multiply.  Nor was there any earthly reason why I as a
Title:  sailor should sleep two in a bed, more than anybody else; for sailors
Title:  no more sleep two in a bed at sea, than bachelor Kings do ashore.  To
Title:  be sure they all sleep together in one apartment, but you have your
Title:  own hammock, and cover yourself with your own blanket, and sleep in
Title:  your own skin.
Title:  
Title:  The more I pondered over this harpooneer, the more I abominated the
Title:  thought of sleeping with him.  It was fair to presume that being a
Title:  harpooneer, his linen or woollen, as the case might be, would not be
Title:  of the tidiest, certainly none of the finest.  I began to twitch all
Title:  over.  Besides, it was getting late, and my decent harpooneer ought
Title:  to be home and going bedwards.  Suppose now, he should tumble in upon
Title:  me at midnight--how could I tell from what vile hole he had been
Title:  coming?
Title:  
Title:  "Landlord!  I've changed my mind about that harpooneer.--I shan't
Title:  sleep with him.  I'll try the bench here."
Title:  
Title:  "Just as you please; I'm sorry I cant spare ye a tablecloth for a
Title:  mattress, and it's a plaguy rough board here"--feeling of the knots
Title:  and notches.  "But wait a bit, Skrimshander; I've got a carpenter's
Title:  plane there in the bar--wait, I say, and I'll make ye snug enough."
Title:  So saying he procured the plane; and with his old silk handkerchief
Title:  first dusting the bench, vigorously set to planing away at my bed,
Title:  the while grinning like an ape.  The shavings flew right and left;
Title:  till at last the plane-iron came bump against an indestructible knot.
Title:  The landlord was near spraining his wrist, and I told him for
Title:  heaven's sake to quit--the bed was soft enough to suit me, and I did
Title:  not know how all the planing in the world could make eider down of a
Title:  pine plank.  So gathering up the shavings with another grin, and
Title:  throwing them into the great stove in the middle of the room, he went
Title:  about his business, and left me in a brown study.
Title:  
Title:  I now took the measure of the bench, and found that it was a foot too
Title:  short; but that could be mended with a chair.  But it was a foot too
Title:  narrow, and the other bench in the room was about four inches higher
Title:  than the planed one--so there was no yoking them.  I then placed the
Title:  first bench lengthwise along the only clear space against the wall,
Title:  leaving a little interval between, for my back to settle down in.
Title:  But I soon found that there came such a draught of cold air over me
Title:  from under the sill of the window, that this plan would never do at
Title:  all, especially as another current from the rickety door met the one
Title:  from the window, and both together formed a series of small
Title:  whirlwinds in the immediate vicinity of the spot where I had thought
Title:  to spend the night.
Title:  
Title:  The devil fetch that harpooneer, thought I, but stop, couldn't I
Title:  steal a march on him--bolt his door inside, and jump into his bed,
Title:  not to be wakened by the most violent knockings?  It seemed no bad
Title:  idea; but upon second thoughts I dismissed it.  For who could tell
Title:  but what the next morning, so soon as I popped out of the room, the
Title:  harpooneer might be standing in the entry, all ready to knock me
Title:  down!
Title:  
Title:  Still, looking round me again, and seeing no possible chance of
Title:  spending a sufferable night unless in some other person's bed, I
Title:  began to think that after all I might be cherishing unwarrantable
Title:  prejudices against this unknown harpooneer.  Thinks I, I'll wait
Title:  awhile; he must be dropping in before long.  I'll have a good look at
Title:  him then, and perhaps we may become jolly good bedfellows after
Title:  all--there's no telling.
Title:  
Title:  But though the other boarders kept coming in by ones, twos, and
Title:  threes, and going to bed, yet no sign of my harpooneer.
Title:  
Title:  "Landlord! said I, "what sort of a chap is he--does he always keep
Title:  such late hours?"  It was now hard upon twelve o'clock.
Title:  
Title:  The landlord chuckled again with his lean chuckle, and seemed to be
Title:  mightily tickled at something beyond my comprehension.  "No," he
Title:  answered, "generally he's an early bird--airley to bed and airley to
Title:  rise--yes, he's the bird what catches the worm.  But to-night he
Title:  went out a peddling, you see, and I don't see what on airth keeps him
Title:  so late, unless, may be, he can't sell his head."
Title:  
Title:  "Can't sell his head?--What sort of a bamboozingly story is this you
Title:  are telling me?" getting into a towering rage.  "Do you pretend to
Title:  say, landlord, that this harpooneer is actually engaged this blessed
Title:  Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, in peddling his head around
Title:  this town?"
Title:  
Title:  "That's precisely it," said the landlord, "and I told him he couldn't
Title:  sell it here, the market's overstocked."
Title:  
Title:  "With what?" shouted I.
Title:  
Title:  "With heads to be sure; ain't there too many heads in the world?"
Title:  
Title:  "I tell you what it is, landlord," said I quite calmly, "you'd better
Title:  stop spinning that yarn to me--I'm not green."
Title:  
Title:  "May be not," taking out a stick and whittling a toothpick, "but I
Title:  rayther guess you'll be done BROWN if that ere harpooneer hears you a
Title:  slanderin' his head."
Title:  
Title:  "I'll break it for him," said I, now flying into a passion again at
Title:  this unaccountable farrago of the landlord's.
Title:  
Title:  "It's broke a'ready," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Broke," said I--"BROKE, do you mean?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sartain, and that's the very reason he can't sell it, I guess."
Title:  
Title:  "Landlord," said I, going up to him as cool as Mt. Hecla in a
Title:  snow-storm--"landlord, stop whittling.  You and I must understand one
Title:  another, and that too without delay.  I come to your house and want a
Title:  bed; you tell me you can only give me half a one; that the other half
Title:  belongs to a certain harpooneer.  And about this harpooneer, whom I
Title:  have not yet seen, you persist in telling me the most mystifying and
Title:  exasperating stories tending to beget in me an uncomfortable feeling
Title:  towards the man whom you design for my bedfellow--a sort of
Title:  connexion, landlord, which is an intimate and confidential one in the
Title:  highest degree.  I now demand of you to speak out and tell me who and
Title:  what this harpooneer is, and whether I shall be in all respects safe
Title:  to spend the night with him.  And in the first place, you will be so
Title:  good as to unsay that story about selling his head, which if true I
Title:  take to be good evidence that this harpooneer is stark mad, and I've
Title:  no idea of sleeping with a madman; and you, sir, YOU I mean,
Title:  landlord, YOU, sir, by trying to induce me to do so knowingly, would
Title:  thereby render yourself liable to a criminal prosecution."
Title:  
Title:  "Wall," said the landlord, fetching a long breath, "that's a purty
Title:  long sarmon for a chap that rips a little now and then.  But be easy,
Title:  be easy, this here harpooneer I have been tellin' you of has just
Title:  arrived from the south seas, where he bought up a lot of 'balmed New
Title:  Zealand heads (great curios, you know), and he's sold all on 'em but
Title:  one, and that one he's trying to sell to-night, cause to-morrow's
Title:  Sunday, and it would not do to be sellin' human heads about the
Title:  streets when folks is goin' to churches.  He wanted to, last Sunday,
Title:  but I stopped him just as he was goin' out of the door with four
Title:  heads strung on a string, for all the airth like a string of inions."
Title:  
Title:  This account cleared up the otherwise unaccountable mystery, and
Title:  showed that the landlord, after all, had had no idea of fooling
Title:  me--but at the same time what could I think of a harpooneer who
Title:  stayed out of a Saturday night clean into the holy Sabbath, engaged
Title:  in such a cannibal business as selling the heads of dead idolators?
Title:  
Title:  "Depend upon it, landlord, that harpooneer is a dangerous man."
Title:  
Title:  "He pays reg'lar," was the rejoinder.  "But come, it's getting
Title:  dreadful late, you had better be turning flukes--it's a nice bed;
Title:  Sal and me slept in that ere bed the night we were spliced.  There's
Title:  plenty of room for two to kick about in that bed; it's an almighty
Title:  big bed that.  Why, afore we give it up, Sal used to put our Sam and
Title:  little Johnny in the foot of it.  But I got a dreaming and sprawling
Title:  about one night, and somehow, Sam got pitched on the floor, and came
Title:  near breaking his arm.  Arter that, Sal said it wouldn't do.  Come
Title:  along here, I'll give ye a glim in a jiffy;" and so saying he lighted
Title:  a candle and held it towards me, offering to lead the way.  But I
Title:  stood irresolute; when looking at a clock in the corner, he exclaimed
Title:  "I vum it's Sunday--you won't see that harpooneer to-night; he's come
Title:  to anchor somewhere--come along then; DO come; WON'T ye come?"
Title:  
Title:  I considered the matter a moment, and then up stairs we went, and I
Title:  was ushered into a small room, cold as a clam, and furnished, sure
Title:  enough, with a prodigious bed, almost big enough indeed for any four
Title:  harpooneers to sleep abreast.
Title:  
Title:  "There," said the landlord, placing the candle on a crazy old sea
Title:  chest that did double duty as a wash-stand and centre table; "there,
Title:  make yourself comfortable now, and good night to ye."  I turned
Title:  round from eyeing the bed, but he had disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  Folding back the counterpane, I stooped over the bed.  Though none of
Title:  the most elegant, it yet stood the scrutiny tolerably well.  I then
Title:  glanced round the room; and besides the bedstead and centre table,
Title:  could see no other furniture belonging to the place, but a rude
Title:  shelf, the four walls, and a papered fireboard representing a man
Title:  striking a whale.  Of things not properly belonging to the room,
Title:  there was a hammock lashed up, and thrown upon the floor in one
Title:  corner; also a large seaman's bag, containing the harpooneer's
Title:  wardrobe, no doubt in lieu of a land trunk.  Likewise, there was a
Title:  parcel of outlandish bone fish hooks on the shelf over the
Title:  fire-place, and a tall harpoon standing at the head of the bed.
Title:  
Title:  But what is this on the chest?  I took it up, and held it close to
Title:  the light, and felt it, and smelt it, and tried every way possible to
Title:  arrive at some satisfactory conclusion concerning it.  I can compare
Title:  it to nothing but a large door mat, ornamented at the edges with
Title:  little tinkling tags something like the stained porcupine quills
Title:  round an Indian moccasin.  There was a hole or slit in the middle of
Title:  this mat, as you see the same in South American ponchos.  But could
Title:  it be possible that any sober harpooneer would get into a door mat,
Title:  and parade the streets of any Christian town in that sort of guise?
Title:  I put it on, to try it, and it weighed me down like a hamper, being
Title:  uncommonly shaggy and thick, and I thought a little damp, as though
Title:  this mysterious harpooneer had been wearing it of a rainy day.  I
Title:  went up in it to a bit of glass stuck against the wall, and I never
Title:  saw such a sight in my life.  I tore myself out of it in such a hurry
Title:  that I gave myself a kink in the neck.
Title:  
Title:  I sat down on the side of the bed, and commenced thinking about this
Title:  head-peddling harpooneer, and his door mat.  After thinking some time
Title:  on the bed-side, I got up and took off my monkey jacket, and then
Title:  stood in the middle of the room thinking.  I then took off my coat,
Title:  and thought a little more in my shirt sleeves.  But beginning to feel
Title:  very cold now, half undressed as I was, and remembering what the
Title:  landlord said about the harpooneer's not coming home at all that
Title:  night, it being so very late, I made no more ado, but jumped out of
Title:  my pantaloons and boots, and then blowing out the light tumbled into
Title:  bed, and commended myself to the care of heaven.
Title:  
Title:  Whether that mattress was stuffed with corn-cobs or broken crockery,
Title:  there is no telling, but I rolled about a good deal, and could not
Title:  sleep for a long time.  At last I slid off into a light doze, and had
Title:  pretty nearly made a good offing towards the land of Nod, when I
Title:  heard a heavy footfall in the passage, and saw a glimmer of light
Title:  come into the room from under the door.
Title:  
Title:  Lord save me, thinks I, that must be the harpooneer, the infernal
Title:  head-peddler.  But I lay perfectly still, and resolved not to say a
Title:  word till spoken to.  Holding a light in one hand, and that identical
Title:  New Zealand head in the other, the stranger entered the room, and
Title:  without looking towards the bed, placed his candle a good way off
Title:  from me on the floor in one corner, and then began working away at
Title:  the knotted cords of the large bag I before spoke of as being in the
Title:  room.  I was all eagerness to see his face, but he kept it averted
Title:  for some time while employed in unlacing the bag's mouth.  This
Title:  accomplished, however, he turned round--when, good heavens! what a
Title:  sight!  Such a face!  It was of a dark, purplish, yellow colour, here
Title:  and there stuck over with large blackish looking squares.  Yes, it's
Title:  just as I thought, he's a terrible bedfellow; he's been in a fight,
Title:  got dreadfully cut, and here he is, just from the surgeon.  But at
Title:  that moment he chanced to turn his face so towards the light, that I
Title:  plainly saw they could not be sticking-plasters at all, those black
Title:  squares on his cheeks.  They were stains of some sort or other.  At
Title:  first I knew not what to make of this; but soon an inkling of the
Title:  truth occurred to me.  I remembered a story of a white man--a
Title:  whaleman too--who, falling among the cannibals, had been tattooed by
Title:  them.  I concluded that this harpooneer, in the course of his distant
Title:  voyages, must have met with a similar adventure.  And what is it,
Title:  thought I, after all!  It's only his outside; a man can be honest in
Title:  any sort of skin.  But then, what to make of his unearthly
Title:  complexion, that part of it, I mean, lying round about, and
Title:  completely independent of the squares of tattooing.  To be sure, it
Title:  might be nothing but a good coat of tropical tanning; but I never
Title:  heard of a hot sun's tanning a white man into a purplish yellow one.
Title:  However, I had never been in the South Seas; and perhaps the sun
Title:  there produced these extraordinary effects upon the skin.  Now, while
Title:  all these ideas were passing through me like lightning, this
Title:  harpooneer never noticed me at all.  But, after some difficulty
Title:  having opened his bag, he commenced fumbling in it, and presently
Title:  pulled out a sort of tomahawk, and a seal-skin wallet with the hair
Title:  on.  Placing these on the old chest in the middle of the room, he
Title:  then took the New Zealand head--a ghastly thing enough--and crammed
Title:  it down into the bag.  He now took off his hat--a new beaver
Title:  hat--when I came nigh singing out with fresh surprise.  There was no
Title:  hair on his head--none to speak of at least--nothing but a small
Title:  scalp-knot twisted up on his forehead.  His bald purplish head now
Title:  looked for all the world like a mildewed skull.  Had not the stranger
Title:  stood between me and the door, I would have bolted out of it quicker
Title:  than ever I bolted a dinner.
Title:  
Title:  Even as it was, I thought something of slipping out of the window,
Title:  but it was the second floor back.  I am no coward, but what to make
Title:  of this head-peddling purple rascal altogether passed my
Title:  comprehension.  Ignorance is the parent of fear, and being completely
Title:  nonplussed and confounded about the stranger, I confess I was now as
Title:  much afraid of him as if it was the devil himself who had thus broken
Title:  into my room at the dead of night.  In fact, I was so afraid of him
Title:  that I was not game enough just then to address him, and demand a
Title:  satisfactory answer concerning what seemed inexplicable in him.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, he continued the business of undressing, and at last
Title:  showed his chest and arms.  As I live, these covered parts of him
Title:  were checkered with the same squares as his face; his back, too, was
Title:  all over the same dark squares; he seemed to have been in a Thirty
Title:  Years' War, and just escaped from it with a sticking-plaster shirt.
Title:  Still more, his very legs were marked, as if a parcel of dark green
Title:  frogs were running up the trunks of young palms.  It was now quite
Title:  plain that he must be some abominable savage or other shipped aboard
Title:  of a whaleman in the South Seas, and so landed in this Christian
Title:  country.  I quaked to think of it.  A peddler of heads too--perhaps
Title:  the heads of his own brothers.  He might take a fancy to
Title:  mine--heavens! look at that tomahawk!
Title:  
Title:  But there was no time for shuddering, for now the savage went about
Title:  something that completely fascinated my attention, and convinced me
Title:  that he must indeed be a heathen.  Going to his heavy grego, or
Title:  wrapall, or dreadnaught, which he had previously hung on a chair, he
Title:  fumbled in the pockets, and produced at length a curious little
Title:  deformed image with a hunch on its back, and exactly the colour of a
Title:  three days' old Congo baby.  Remembering the embalmed head, at first
Title:  I almost thought that this black manikin was a real baby preserved
Title:  in some similar manner.  But seeing that it was not at all limber,
Title:  and that it glistened a good deal like polished ebony, I concluded
Title:  that it must be nothing but a wooden idol, which indeed it proved to
Title:  be.  For now the savage goes up to the empty fire-place, and removing
Title:  the papered fire-board, sets up this little hunch-backed image, like
Title:  a tenpin, between the andirons.  The chimney jambs and all the bricks
Title:  inside were very sooty, so that I thought this fire-place made a very
Title:  appropriate little shrine or chapel for his Congo idol.
Title:  
Title:  I now screwed my eyes hard towards the half hidden image, feeling but
Title:  ill at ease meantime--to see what was next to follow.  First he takes
Title:  about a double handful of shavings out of his grego pocket, and
Title:  places them carefully before the idol; then laying a bit of ship
Title:  biscuit on top and applying the flame from the lamp, he kindled the
Title:  shavings into a sacrificial blaze.  Presently, after many hasty
Title:  snatches into the fire, and still hastier withdrawals of his fingers
Title:  (whereby he seemed to be scorching them badly), he at last succeeded
Title:  in drawing out the biscuit; then blowing off the heat and ashes a
Title:  little, he made a polite offer of it to the little negro.  But the
Title:  little devil did not seem to fancy such dry sort of fare at all; he
Title:  never moved his lips.  All these strange antics were accompanied by
Title:  still stranger guttural noises from the devotee, who seemed to be
Title:  praying in a sing-song or else singing some pagan psalmody or other,
Title:  during which his face twitched about in the most unnatural manner.
Title:  At last extinguishing the fire, he took the idol up very
Title:  unceremoniously, and bagged it again in his grego pocket as
Title:  carelessly as if he were a sportsman bagging a dead woodcock.
Title:  
Title:  All these queer proceedings increased my uncomfortableness, and
Title:  seeing him now exhibiting strong symptoms of concluding his business
Title:  operations, and jumping into bed with me, I thought it was high time,
Title:  now or never, before the light was put out, to break the spell in
Title:  which I had so long been bound.
Title:  
Title:  But the interval I spent in deliberating what to say, was a fatal
Title:  one.  Taking up his tomahawk from the table, he examined the head of
Title:  it for an instant, and then holding it to the light, with his mouth
Title:  at the handle, he puffed out great clouds of tobacco smoke.  The next
Title:  moment the light was extinguished, and this wild cannibal, tomahawk
Title:  between his teeth, sprang into bed with me.  I sang out, I could not
Title:  help it now; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment he began
Title:  feeling me.
Title:  
Title:  Stammering out something, I knew not what, I rolled away from him
Title:  against the wall, and then conjured him, whoever or whatever he might
Title:  be, to keep quiet, and let me get up and light the lamp again.  But
Title:  his guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill
Title:  comprehended my meaning.
Title:  
Title:  "Who-e debel you?"--he at last said--"you no speak-e, dam-me, I
Title:  kill-e."  And so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about
Title:  me in the dark.
Title:  
Title:  "Landlord, for God's sake, Peter Coffin!" shouted I.  "Landlord!
Title:  Watch!  Coffin!  Angels! save me!"
Title:  
Title:  "Speak-e! tell-ee me who-ee be, or dam-me, I kill-e!" again growled
Title:  the cannibal, while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered
Title:  the hot tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on
Title:  fire.  But thank heaven, at that moment the landlord came into the
Title:  room light in hand, and leaping from the bed I ran up to him.
Title:  
Title:  "Don't be afraid now," said he, grinning again, "Queequeg here
Title:  wouldn't harm a hair of your head."
Title:  
Title:  "Stop your grinning," shouted I, "and why didn't you tell me that
Title:  that infernal harpooneer was a cannibal?"
Title:  
Title:  "I thought ye know'd it;--didn't I tell ye, he was a peddlin' heads
Title:  around town?--but turn flukes again and go to sleep.  Queequeg, look
Title:  here--you sabbee me, I sabbee--you this man sleepe you--you sabbee?"
Title:  
Title:  "Me sabbee plenty"--grunted Queequeg, puffing away at his pipe and
Title:  sitting up in bed.
Title:  
Title:  "You gettee in," he added, motioning to me with his tomahawk, and
Title:  throwing the clothes to one side.  He really did this in not only a
Title:  civil but a really kind and charitable way.  I stood looking at him a
Title:  moment.  For all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean, comely
Title:  looking cannibal.  What's all this fuss I have been making about,
Title:  thought I to myself--the man's a human being just as I am: he has
Title:  just as much reason to fear me, as I have to be afraid of him.
Title:  Better sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.
Title:  
Title:  "Landlord," said I, "tell him to stash his tomahawk there, or pipe,
Title:  or whatever you call it; tell him to stop smoking, in short, and I
Title:  will turn in with him.  But I don't fancy having a man smoking in bed
Title:  with me.  It's dangerous.  Besides, I ain't insured."
Title:  
Title:  This being told to Queequeg, he at once complied, and again politely
Title:  motioned me to get into bed--rolling over to one side as much as to
Title:  say--I won't touch a leg of ye."
Title:  
Title:  "Good night, landlord," said I, "you may go."
Title:  
Title:  I turned in, and never slept better in my life.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 4
Title:  
Title:  The Counterpane.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg's arm
Title:  thrown over me in the most loving and affectionate manner.  You had
Title:  almost thought I had been his wife.  The counterpane was of
Title:  patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured squares and triangles;
Title:  and this arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable Cretan
Title:  labyrinth of a figure, no two parts of which were of one precise
Title:  shade--owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically
Title:  in sun and shade, his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various
Title:  times--this same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a
Title:  strip of that same patchwork quilt.  Indeed, partly lying on it as
Title:  the arm did when I first awoke, I could hardly tell it from the
Title:  quilt, they so blended their hues together; and it was only by the
Title:  sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that Queequeg was
Title:  hugging me.
Title:  
Title:  My sensations were strange.  Let me try to explain them.  When I was
Title:  a child, I well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell
Title:  me; whether it was a reality or a dream, I never could entirely
Title:  settle.  The circumstance was this.  I had been cutting up some caper
Title:  or other--I think it was trying to crawl up the chimney, as I had
Title:  seen a little sweep do a few days previous; and my stepmother who,
Title:  somehow or other, was all the time whipping me, or sending me to bed
Title:  supperless,--my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and
Title:  packed me off to bed, though it was only two o'clock in the afternoon
Title:  of the 21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere.  I
Title:  felt dreadfully.  But there was no help for it, so up stairs I went
Title:  to my little room in the third floor, undressed myself as slowly as
Title:  possible so as to kill time, and with a bitter sigh got between the
Title:  sheets.
Title:  
Title:  I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must
Title:  elapse before I could hope for a resurrection.  Sixteen hours in bed!
Title:  the small of my back ached to think of it.  And it was so light too;
Title:  the sun shining in at the window, and a great rattling of coaches in
Title:  the streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house.  I felt
Title:  worse and worse--at last I got up, dressed, and softly going down in
Title:  my stockinged feet, sought out my stepmother, and suddenly threw
Title:  myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular favour to give me a
Title:  good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning
Title:  me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time.  But she was the
Title:  best and most conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to
Title:  my room.  For several hours I lay there broad awake, feeling a great
Title:  deal worse than I have ever done since, even from the greatest
Title:  subsequent misfortunes.  At last I must have fallen into a troubled
Title:  nightmare of a doze; and slowly waking from it--half steeped in
Title:  dreams--I opened my eyes, and the before sun-lit room was now wrapped
Title:  in outer darkness.  Instantly I felt a shock running through all my
Title:  frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a
Title:  supernatural hand seemed placed in mine.  My arm hung over the
Title:  counterpane, and the nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom,
Title:  to which the hand belonged, seemed closely seated by my bed-side.
Title:  For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay there, frozen with the most
Title:  awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand; yet ever thinking that
Title:  if I could but stir it one single inch, the horrid spell would be
Title:  broken.  I knew not how this consciousness at last glided away from
Title:  me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly remembered it all, and
Title:  for days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in confounding
Title:  attempts to explain the mystery.  Nay, to this very hour, I often
Title:  puzzle myself with it.
Title:  
Title:  Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the
Title:  supernatural hand in mine were very similar, in their strangeness,
Title:  to those which I experienced on waking up and seeing Queequeg's pagan
Title:  arm thrown round me.  But at length all the past night's events
Title:  soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed reality, and then I lay only
Title:  alive to the comical predicament.  For though I tried to move his
Title:  arm--unlock his bridegroom clasp--yet, sleeping as he was, he still
Title:  hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain.
Title:  I now strove to rouse him--"Queequeg!"--but his only answer was a
Title:  snore.  I then rolled over, my neck feeling as if it were in a
Title:  horse-collar; and suddenly felt a slight scratch.  Throwing aside the
Title:  counterpane, there lay the tomahawk sleeping by the savage's side, as
Title:  if it were a hatchet-faced baby.  A pretty pickle, truly, thought I;
Title:  abed here in a strange house in the broad day, with a cannibal and a
Title:  tomahawk!  "Queequeg!--in the name of goodness, Queequeg, wake!"  At
Title:  length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and incessant
Title:  expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male
Title:  in that matrimonial sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt;
Title:  and presently, he drew back his arm, shook himself all over like a
Title:  Newfoundland dog just from the water, and sat up in bed, stiff as a
Title:  pike-staff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes as if he did not
Title:  altogether remember how I came to be there, though a dim
Title:  consciousness of knowing something about me seemed slowly dawning
Title:  over him.  Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious
Title:  misgivings now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a
Title:  creature.  When, at last, his mind seemed made up touching the
Title:  character of his bedfellow, and he became, as it were, reconciled to
Title:  the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and by certain signs and
Title:  sounds gave me to understand that, if it pleased me, he would dress
Title:  first and then leave me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole
Title:  apartment to myself.  Thinks I, Queequeg, under the circumstances,
Title:  this is a very civilized overture; but, the truth is, these savages
Title:  have an innate sense of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous
Title:  how essentially polite they are.  I pay this particular compliment to
Title:  Queequeg, because he treated me with so much civility and
Title:  consideration, while I was guilty of great rudeness; staring at him
Title:  from the bed, and watching all his toilette motions; for the time my
Title:  curiosity getting the better of my breeding.  Nevertheless, a man
Title:  like Queequeg you don't see every day, he and his ways were well
Title:  worth unusual regarding.
Title:  
Title:  He commenced dressing at top by donning his beaver hat, a very tall
Title:  one, by the by, and then--still minus his trowsers--he hunted up his
Title:  boots.  What under the heavens he did it for, I cannot tell, but his
Title:  next movement was to crush himself--boots in hand, and hat on--under
Title:  the bed; when, from sundry violent gaspings and strainings, I
Title:  inferred he was hard at work booting himself; though by no law of
Title:  propriety that I ever heard of, is any man required to be private
Title:  when putting on his boots.  But Queequeg, do you see, was a creature
Title:  in the transition stage--neither caterpillar nor butterfly.  He was
Title:  just enough civilized to show off his outlandishness in the strangest
Title:  possible manners.  His education was not yet completed.  He was an
Title:  undergraduate.  If he had not been a small degree civilized, he very
Title:  probably would not have troubled himself with boots at all; but then,
Title:  if he had not been still a savage, he never would have dreamt of
Title:  getting under the bed to put them on.  At last, he emerged with his
Title:  hat very much dented and crushed down over his eyes, and began
Title:  creaking and limping about the room, as if, not being much accustomed
Title:  to boots, his pair of damp, wrinkled cowhide ones--probably not made
Title:  to order either--rather pinched and tormented him at the first go off
Title:  of a bitter cold morning.
Title:  
Title:  Seeing, now, that there were no curtains to the window, and that the
Title:  street being very narrow, the house opposite commanded a plain view
Title:  into the room, and observing more and more the indecorous figure that
Title:  Queequeg made, staving about with little else but his hat and boots
Title:  on; I begged him as well as I could, to accelerate his toilet
Title:  somewhat, and particularly to get into his pantaloons as soon as
Title:  possible.  He complied, and then proceeded to wash himself.  At that
Title:  time in the morning any Christian would have washed his face; but
Title:  Queequeg, to my amazement, contented himself with restricting his
Title:  ablutions to his chest, arms, and hands.  He then donned his
Title:  waistcoat, and taking up a piece of hard soap on the wash-stand
Title:  centre table, dipped it into water and commenced lathering his face.
Title:  I was watching to see where he kept his razor, when lo and behold, he
Title:  takes the harpoon from the bed corner, slips out the long wooden
Title:  stock, unsheathes the head, whets it a little on his boot, and
Title:  striding up to the bit of mirror against the wall, begins a vigorous
Title:  scraping, or rather harpooning of his cheeks.  Thinks I, Queequeg,
Title:  this is using Rogers's best cutlery with a vengeance.  Afterwards I
Title:  wondered the less at this operation when I came to know of what fine
Title:  steel the head of a harpoon is made, and how exceedingly sharp the
Title:  long straight edges are always kept.
Title:  
Title:  The rest of his toilet was soon achieved, and he proudly marched out
Title:  of the room, wrapped up in his great pilot monkey jacket, and
Title:  sporting his harpoon like a marshal's baton.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 5
Title:  
Title:  Breakfast.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I quickly followed suit, and descending into the bar-room accosted
Title:  the grinning landlord very pleasantly.  I cherished no malice towards
Title:  him, though he had been skylarking with me not a little in the matter
Title:  of my bedfellow.
Title:  
Title:  However, a good laugh is a mighty good thing, and rather too scarce a
Title:  good thing; the more's the pity.  So, if any one man, in his own
Title:  proper person, afford stuff for a good joke to anybody, let him not
Title:  be backward, but let him cheerfully allow himself to spend and be
Title:  spent in that way.  And the man that has anything bountifully
Title:  laughable about him, be sure there is more in that man than you
Title:  perhaps think for.
Title:  
Title:  The bar-room was now full of the boarders who had been dropping in
Title:  the night previous, and whom I had not as yet had a good look at.
Title:  They were nearly all whalemen; chief mates, and second mates, and
Title:  third mates, and sea carpenters, and sea coopers, and sea
Title:  blacksmiths, and harpooneers, and ship keepers; a brown and brawny
Title:  company, with bosky beards; an unshorn, shaggy set, all wearing
Title:  monkey jackets for morning gowns.
Title:  
Title:  You could pretty plainly tell how long each one had been ashore.
Title:  This young fellow's healthy cheek is like a sun-toasted pear in hue,
Title:  and would seem to smell almost as musky; he cannot have been three
Title:  days landed from his Indian voyage.  That man next him looks a few
Title:  shades lighter; you might say a touch of satin wood is in him.  In
Title:  the complexion of a third still lingers a tropic tawn, but slightly
Title:  bleached withal; HE doubtless has tarried whole weeks ashore.  But
Title:  who could show a cheek like Queequeg? which, barred with various
Title:  tints, seemed like the Andes' western slope, to show forth in one
Title:  array, contrasting climates, zone by zone.
Title:  
Title:  "Grub, ho!" now cried the landlord, flinging open a door, and in we
Title:  went to breakfast.
Title:  
Title:  They say that men who have seen the world, thereby become quite at
Title:  ease in manner, quite self-possessed in company.  Not always, though:
Title:  Ledyard, the great New England traveller, and Mungo Park, the Scotch
Title:  one; of all men, they possessed the least assurance in the parlor.
Title:  But perhaps the mere crossing of Siberia in a sledge drawn by dogs as
Title:  Ledyard did, or the taking a long solitary walk on an empty stomach,
Title:  in the negro heart of Africa, which was the sum of poor Mungo's
Title:  performances--this kind of travel, I say, may not be the very best
Title:  mode of attaining a high social polish.  Still, for the most part,
Title:  that sort of thing is to be had anywhere.
Title:  
Title:  These reflections just here are occasioned by the circumstance that
Title:  after we were all seated at the table, and I was preparing to hear
Title:  some good stories about whaling; to my no small surprise, nearly
Title:  every man maintained a profound silence.  And not only that, but they
Title:  looked embarrassed.  Yes, here were a set of sea-dogs, many of whom
Title:  without the slightest bashfulness had boarded great whales on the
Title:  high seas--entire strangers to them--and duelled them dead without
Title:  winking; and yet, here they sat at a social breakfast table--all of
Title:  the same calling, all of kindred tastes--looking round as sheepishly
Title:  at each other as though they had never been out of sight of some
Title:  sheepfold among the Green Mountains.  A curious sight; these bashful
Title:  bears, these timid warrior whalemen!
Title:  
Title:  But as for Queequeg--why, Queequeg sat there among them--at the head
Title:  of the table, too, it so chanced; as cool as an icicle.  To be sure I
Title:  cannot say much for his breeding.  His greatest admirer could not
Title:  have cordially justified his bringing his harpoon into breakfast with
Title:  him, and using it there without ceremony; reaching over the table
Title:  with it, to the imminent jeopardy of many heads, and grappling the
Title:  beefsteaks towards him.  But THAT was certainly very coolly done by
Title:  him, and every one knows that in most people's estimation, to do
Title:  anything coolly is to do it genteelly.
Title:  
Title:  We will not speak of all Queequeg's peculiarities here; how he
Title:  eschewed coffee and hot rolls, and applied his undivided attention to
Title:  beefsteaks, done rare.  Enough, that when breakfast was over he
Title:  withdrew like the rest into the public room, lighted his
Title:  tomahawk-pipe, and was sitting there quietly digesting and smoking
Title:  with his inseparable hat on, when I sallied out for a stroll.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 6
Title:  
Title:  The Street.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  If I had been astonished at first catching a glimpse of so outlandish
Title:  an individual as Queequeg circulating among the polite society of a
Title:  civilized town, that astonishment soon departed upon taking my first
Title:  daylight stroll through the streets of New Bedford.
Title:  
Title:  In thoroughfares nigh the docks, any considerable seaport will
Title:  frequently offer to view the queerest looking nondescripts from
Title:  foreign parts.  Even in Broadway and Chestnut streets, Mediterranean
Title:  mariners will sometimes jostle the affrighted ladies.  Regent Street
Title:  is not unknown to Lascars and Malays; and at Bombay, in the Apollo
Title:  Green, live Yankees have often scared the natives.  But New Bedford
Title:  beats all Water Street and Wapping.  In these last-mentioned haunts
Title:  you see only sailors; but in New Bedford, actual cannibals stand
Title:  chatting at street corners; savages outright; many of whom yet carry
Title:  on their bones unholy flesh.  It makes a stranger stare.
Title:  
Title:  But, besides the Feegeeans, Tongatobooarrs, Erromanggoans,
Title:  Pannangians, and Brighggians, and, besides the wild specimens of the
Title:  whaling-craft which unheeded reel about the streets, you will see
Title:  other sights still more curious, certainly more comical.  There
Title:  weekly arrive in this town scores of green Vermonters and New
Title:  Hampshire men, all athirst for gain and glory in the fishery.  They
Title:  are mostly young, of stalwart frames; fellows who have felled
Title:  forests, and now seek to drop the axe and snatch the whale-lance.
Title:  Many are as green as the Green Mountains whence they came.  In some
Title:  things you would think them but a few hours old.  Look there! that
Title:  chap strutting round the corner.  He wears a beaver hat and
Title:  swallow-tailed coat, girdled with a sailor-belt and sheath-knife.
Title:  Here comes another with a sou'-wester and a bombazine cloak.
Title:  
Title:  No town-bred dandy will compare with a country-bred one--I mean a
Title:  downright bumpkin dandy--a fellow that, in the dog-days, will mow his
Title:  two acres in buckskin gloves for fear of tanning his hands.  Now when
Title:  a country dandy like this takes it into his head to make a
Title:  distinguished reputation, and joins the great whale-fishery, you
Title:  should see the comical things he does upon reaching the seaport.  In
Title:  bespeaking his sea-outfit, he orders bell-buttons to his waistcoats;
Title:  straps to his canvas trowsers.  Ah, poor Hay-Seed! how bitterly will
Title:  burst those straps in the first howling gale, when thou art driven,
Title:  straps, buttons, and all, down the throat of the tempest.
Title:  
Title:  But think not that this famous town has only harpooneers, cannibals,
Title:  and bumpkins to show her visitors.  Not at all.  Still New Bedford is
Title:  a queer place.  Had it not been for us whalemen, that tract of land
Title:  would this day perhaps have been in as howling condition as the coast
Title:  of Labrador.  As it is, parts of her back country are enough to
Title:  frighten one, they look so bony.  The town itself is perhaps the
Title:  dearest place to live in, in all New England.  It is a land of oil,
Title:  true enough: but not like Canaan; a land, also, of corn and wine.
Title:  The streets do not run with milk; nor in the spring-time do they pave
Title:  them with fresh eggs.  Yet, in spite of this, nowhere in all America
Title:  will you find more patrician-like houses; parks and gardens more
Title:  opulent, than in New Bedford.  Whence came they? how planted upon
Title:  this once scraggy scoria of a country?
Title:  
Title:  Go and gaze upon the iron emblematical harpoons round yonder lofty
Title:  mansion, and your question will be answered.  Yes; all these brave
Title:  houses and flowery gardens came from the Atlantic, Pacific, and
Title:  Indian oceans.  One and all, they were harpooned and dragged up
Title:  hither from the bottom of the sea.  Can Herr Alexander perform a feat
Title:  like that?
Title:  
Title:  In New Bedford, fathers, they say, give whales for dowers to their
Title:  daughters, and portion off their nieces with a few porpoises a-piece.
Title:  You must go to New Bedford to see a brilliant wedding; for, they
Title:  say, they have reservoirs of oil in every house, and every night
Title:  recklessly burn their lengths in spermaceti candles.
Title:  
Title:  In summer time, the town is sweet to see; full of fine maples--long
Title:  avenues of green and gold.  And in August, high in air, the beautiful
Title:  and bountiful horse-chestnuts, candelabra-wise, proffer the passer-by
Title:  their tapering upright cones of congregated blossoms.  So omnipotent
Title:  is art; which in many a district of New Bedford has superinduced
Title:  bright terraces of flowers upon the barren refuse rocks thrown aside
Title:  at creation's final day.
Title:  
Title:  And the women of New Bedford, they bloom like their own red roses.
Title:  But roses only bloom in summer; whereas the fine carnation of their
Title:  cheeks is perennial as sunlight in the seventh heavens.  Elsewhere
Title:  match that bloom of theirs, ye cannot, save in Salem, where they tell
Title:  me the young girls breathe such musk, their sailor sweethearts smell
Title:  them miles off shore, as though they were drawing nigh the odorous
Title:  Moluccas instead of the Puritanic sands.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 7
Title:  
Title:  The Chapel.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  In this same New Bedford there stands a Whaleman's Chapel, and few
Title:  are the moody fishermen, shortly bound for the Indian Ocean or
Title:  Pacific, who fail to make a Sunday visit to the spot.  I am sure that
Title:  I did not.
Title:  
Title:  Returning from my first morning stroll, I again sallied out upon this
Title:  special errand.  The sky had changed from clear, sunny cold, to
Title:  driving sleet and mist.  Wrapping myself in my shaggy jacket of the
Title:  cloth called bearskin, I fought my way against the stubborn storm.
Title:  Entering, I found a small scattered congregation of sailors, and
Title:  sailors' wives and widows.  A muffled silence reigned, only broken at
Title:  times by the shrieks of the storm.  Each silent worshipper seemed
Title:  purposely sitting apart from the other, as if each silent grief were
Title:  insular and incommunicable.  The chaplain had not yet arrived; and
Title:  there these silent islands of men and women sat steadfastly eyeing
Title:  several marble tablets, with black borders, masoned into the wall on
Title:  either side the pulpit.  Three of them ran something like the
Title:  following, but I do not pretend to quote:--
Title:  
Title:  SACRED
Title:  TO THE MEMORY
Title:  OF
Title:  JOHN TALBOT,
Title:  Who, at the age of eighteen, was lost overboard,
Title:  Near the Isle of Desolation, off Patagonia,
Title:  November 1st, 1836.
Title:  THIS TABLET
Title:  Is erected to his Memory
Title:  BY HIS
Title:  SISTER.
Title:  _____________
Title:  
Title:  SACRED
Title:  TO THE MEMORY
Title:  OF
Title:  ROBERT LONG, WILLIS ELLERY,
Title:  NATHAN COLEMAN, WALTER CANNY, SETH MACY,
Title:  AND SAMUEL GLEIG,
Title:  Forming one of the boats' crews
Title:  OF
Title:  THE SHIP ELIZA
Title:  Who were towed out of sight by a Whale,
Title:  On the Off-shore Ground in the
Title:  PACIFIC,
Title:  December 31st, 1839.
Title:  THIS MARBLE
Title:  Is here placed by their surviving
Title:  SHIPMATES.
Title:  _____________
Title:  
Title:  SACRED
Title:  TO THE MEMORY
Title:  OF
Title:  The late
Title:  CAPTAIN EZEKIEL HARDY,
Title:  Who in the bows of his boat was killed by a
Title:  Sperm Whale on the coast of Japan,
Title:  AUGUST 3d, 1833.
Title:  THIS TABLET
Title:  Is erected to his Memory
Title:  BY
Title:  HIS WIDOW.
Title:  
Title:  Shaking off the sleet from my ice-glazed hat and jacket, I seated
Title:  myself near the door, and turning sideways was surprised to see
Title:  Queequeg near me.  Affected by the solemnity of the scene, there was
Title:  a wondering gaze of incredulous curiosity in his countenance.  This
Title:  savage was the only person present who seemed to notice my entrance;
Title:  because he was the only one who could not read, and, therefore, was
Title:  not reading those frigid inscriptions on the wall.  Whether any of
Title:  the relatives of the seamen whose names appeared there were now among
Title:  the congregation, I knew not; but so many are the unrecorded
Title:  accidents in the fishery, and so plainly did several women present
Title:  wear the countenance if not the trappings of some unceasing grief,
Title:  that I feel sure that here before me were assembled those, in whose
Title:  unhealing hearts the sight of those bleak tablets sympathetically
Title:  caused the old wounds to bleed afresh.
Title:  
Title:  Oh! ye whose dead lie buried beneath the green grass; who standing
Title:  among flowers can say--here, HERE lies my beloved; ye know not the
Title:  desolation that broods in bosoms like these.  What bitter blanks in
Title:  those black-bordered marbles which cover no ashes!  What despair in
Title:  those immovable inscriptions!  What deadly voids and unbidden
Title:  infidelities in the lines that seem to gnaw upon all Faith, and
Title:  refuse resurrections to the beings who have placelessly perished
Title:  without a grave.  As well might those tablets stand in the cave of
Title:  Elephanta as here.
Title:  
Title:  In what census of living creatures, the dead of mankind are included;
Title:  why it is that a universal proverb says of them, that they tell no
Title:  tales, though containing more secrets than the Goodwin Sands; how it
Title:  is that to his name who yesterday departed for the other world, we
Title:  prefix so significant and infidel a word, and yet do not thus entitle
Title:  him, if he but embarks for the remotest Indies of this living earth;
Title:  why the Life Insurance Companies pay death-forfeitures upon
Title:  immortals; in what eternal, unstirring paralysis, and deadly,
Title:  hopeless trance, yet lies antique Adam who died sixty round centuries
Title:  ago; how it is that we still refuse to be comforted for those who we
Title:  nevertheless maintain are dwelling in unspeakable bliss; why all the
Title:  living so strive to hush all the dead; wherefore but the rumor of a
Title:  knocking in a tomb will terrify a whole city.  All these things are
Title:  not without their meanings.
Title:  
Title:  But Faith, like a jackal, feeds among the tombs, and even from these
Title:  dead doubts she gathers her most vital hope.
Title:  
Title:  It needs scarcely to be told, with what feelings, on the eve of a
Title:  Nantucket voyage, I regarded those marble tablets, and by the murky
Title:  light of that darkened, doleful day read the fate of the whalemen who
Title:  had gone before me.  Yes, Ishmael, the same fate may be thine.  But
Title:  somehow I grew merry again.  Delightful inducements to embark, fine
Title:  chance for promotion, it seems--aye, a stove boat will make me an
Title:  immortal by brevet.  Yes, there is death in this business of
Title:  whaling--a speechlessly quick chaotic bundling of a man into
Title:  Eternity.  But what then?  Methinks we have hugely mistaken this
Title:  matter of Life and Death.  Methinks that what they call my shadow
Title:  here on earth is my true substance.  Methinks that in looking at
Title:  things spiritual, we are too much like oysters observing the sun
Title:  through the water, and thinking that thick water the thinnest of air.
Title:  Methinks my body is but the lees of my better being.  In fact take
Title:  my body who will, take it I say, it is not me.  And therefore three
Title:  cheers for Nantucket; and come a stove boat and stove body when they
Title:  will, for stave my soul, Jove himself cannot.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 8
Title:  
Title:  The Pulpit.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I had not been seated very long ere a man of a certain venerable
Title:  robustness entered; immediately as the storm-pelted door flew back
Title:  upon admitting him, a quick regardful eyeing of him by all the
Title:  congregation, sufficiently attested that this fine old man was the
Title:  chaplain.  Yes, it was the famous Father Mapple, so called by the
Title:  whalemen, among whom he was a very great favourite.  He had been a
Title:  sailor and a harpooneer in his youth, but for many years past had
Title:  dedicated his life to the ministry.  At the time I now write of,
Title:  Father Mapple was in the hardy winter of a healthy old age; that sort
Title:  of old age which seems merging into a second flowering youth, for
Title:  among all the fissures of his wrinkles, there shone certain mild
Title:  gleams of a newly developing bloom--the spring verdure peeping forth
Title:  even beneath February's snow.  No one having previously heard his
Title:  history, could for the first time behold Father Mapple without the
Title:  utmost interest, because there were certain engrafted clerical
Title:  peculiarities about him, imputable to that adventurous maritime life
Title:  he had led.  When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella,
Title:  and certainly had not come in his carriage, for his tarpaulin hat ran
Title:  down with melting sleet, and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed
Title:  almost to drag him to the floor with the weight of the water it had
Title:  absorbed.  However, hat and coat and overshoes were one by one
Title:  removed, and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner; when,
Title:  arrayed in a decent suit, he quietly approached the pulpit.
Title:  
Title:  Like most old fashioned pulpits, it was a very lofty one, and since a
Title:  regular stairs to such a height would, by its long angle with the
Title:  floor, seriously contract the already small area of the chapel, the
Title:  architect, it seemed, had acted upon the hint of Father Mapple, and
Title:  finished the pulpit without a stairs, substituting a perpendicular
Title:  side ladder, like those used in mounting a ship from a boat at sea.
Title:  The wife of a whaling captain had provided the chapel with a handsome
Title:  pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder, which, being itself
Title:  nicely headed, and stained with a mahogany colour, the whole
Title:  contrivance, considering what manner of chapel it was, seemed by no
Title:  means in bad taste.  Halting for an instant at the foot of the
Title:  ladder, and with both hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the
Title:  man-ropes, Father Mapple cast a look upwards, and then with a truly
Title:  sailor-like but still reverential dexterity, hand over hand, mounted
Title:  the steps as if ascending the main-top of his vessel.
Title:  
Title:  The perpendicular parts of this side ladder, as is usually the case
Title:  with swinging ones, were of cloth-covered rope, only the rounds were
Title:  of wood, so that at every step there was a joint.  At my first
Title:  glimpse of the pulpit, it had not escaped me that however convenient
Title:  for a ship, these joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary.
Title:  For I was not prepared to see Father Mapple after gaining the height,
Title:  slowly turn round, and stooping over the pulpit, deliberately drag up
Title:  the ladder step by step, till the whole was deposited within, leaving
Title:  him impregnable in his little Quebec.
Title:  
Title:  I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this.
Title:  Father Mapple enjoyed such a wide reputation for sincerity and
Title:  sanctity, that I could not suspect him of courting notoriety by any
Title:  mere tricks of the stage.  No, thought I, there must be some sober
Title:  reason for this thing; furthermore, it must symbolize something
Title:  unseen.  Can it be, then, that by that act of physical isolation, he
Title:  signifies his spiritual withdrawal for the time, from all outward
Title:  worldly ties and connexions?  Yes, for replenished with the meat and
Title:  wine of the word, to the faithful man of God, this pulpit, I see, is
Title:  a self-containing stronghold--a lofty Ehrenbreitstein, with a
Title:  perennial well of water within the walls.
Title:  
Title:  But the side ladder was not the only strange feature of the place,
Title:  borrowed from the chaplain's former sea-farings.  Between the marble
Title:  cenotaphs on either hand of the pulpit, the wall which formed its
Title:  back was adorned with a large painting representing a gallant ship
Title:  beating against a terrible storm off a lee coast of black rocks and
Title:  snowy breakers.  But high above the flying scud and dark-rolling
Title:  clouds, there floated a little isle of sunlight, from which beamed
Title:  forth an angel's face; and this bright face shed a distinct spot of
Title:  radiance upon the ship's tossed deck, something like that silver
Title:  plate now inserted into the Victory's plank where Nelson fell.  "Ah,
Title:  noble ship," the angel seemed to say, "beat on, beat on, thou noble
Title:  ship, and bear a hardy helm; for lo! the sun is breaking through; the
Title:  clouds are rolling off--serenest azure is at hand."
Title:  
Title:  Nor was the pulpit itself without a trace of the same sea-taste that
Title:  had achieved the ladder and the picture.  Its panelled front was in
Title:  the likeness of a ship's bluff bows, and the Holy Bible rested on a
Title:  projecting piece of scroll work, fashioned after a ship's
Title:  fiddle-headed beak.
Title:  
Title:  What could be more full of meaning?--for the pulpit is ever this
Title:  earth's foremost part; all the rest comes in its rear; the pulpit
Title:  leads the world.  From thence it is the storm of God's quick wrath is
Title:  first descried, and the bow must bear the earliest brunt.  From
Title:  thence it is the God of breezes fair or foul is first invoked for
Title:  favourable winds.  Yes, the world's a ship on its passage out, and not
Title:  a voyage complete; and the pulpit is its prow.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 9
Title:  
Title:  The Sermon.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Father Mapple rose, and in a mild voice of unassuming authority
Title:  ordered the scattered people to condense.  "Starboard gangway,
Title:  there! side away to larboard--larboard gangway to starboard!
Title:  Midships! midships!"
Title:  
Title:  There was a low rumbling of heavy sea-boots among the benches, and a
Title:  still slighter shuffling of women's shoes, and all was quiet again,
Title:  and every eye on the preacher.
Title:  
Title:  He paused a little; then kneeling in the pulpit's bows, folded his
Title:  large brown hands across his chest, uplifted his closed eyes, and
Title:  offered a prayer so deeply devout that he seemed kneeling and praying
Title:  at the bottom of the sea.
Title:  
Title:  This ended, in prolonged solemn tones, like the continual tolling of
Title:  a bell in a ship that is foundering at sea in a fog--in such tones he
Title:  commenced reading the following hymn; but changing his manner towards
Title:  the concluding stanzas, burst forth with a pealing exultation and
Title:  joy--
Title:  
Title:  "The ribs and terrors in the whale,
Title:  Arched over me a dismal gloom,
Title:  While all God's sun-lit waves rolled by,
Title:  And lift me deepening down to doom.
Title:  
Title:  "I saw the opening maw of hell,
Title:  With endless pains and sorrows there;
Title:  Which none but they that feel can tell--
Title:  Oh, I was plunging to despair.
Title:  
Title:  "In black distress, I called my God,
Title:  When I could scarce believe him mine,
Title:  He bowed his ear to my complaints--
Title:  No more the whale did me confine.
Title:  
Title:  "With speed he flew to my relief,
Title:  As on a radiant dolphin borne;
Title:  Awful, yet bright, as lightning shone
Title:  The face of my Deliverer God.
Title:  
Title:  "My song for ever shall record
Title:  That terrible, that joyful hour;
Title:  I give the glory to my God,
Title:  His all the mercy and the power.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Nearly all joined in singing this hymn, which swelled high above the
Title:  howling of the storm.  A brief pause ensued; the preacher slowly
Title:  turned over the leaves of the Bible, and at last, folding his hand
Title:  down upon the proper page, said: "Beloved shipmates, clinch the last
Title:  verse of the first chapter of Jonah--'And God had prepared a great
Title:  fish to swallow up Jonah.'"
Title:  
Title:  "Shipmates, this book, containing only four chapters--four yarns--is
Title:  one of the smallest strands in the mighty cable of the Scriptures.
Title:  Yet what depths of the soul does Jonah's deep sealine sound! what a
Title:  pregnant lesson to us is this prophet!  What a noble thing is that
Title:  canticle in the fish's belly!  How billow-like and boisterously
Title:  grand!  We feel the floods surging over us; we sound with him to the
Title:  kelpy bottom of the waters; sea-weed and all the slime of the sea is
Title:  about us!  But WHAT is this lesson that the book of Jonah teaches?
Title:  Shipmates, it is a two-stranded lesson; a lesson to us all as sinful
Title:  men, and a lesson to me as a pilot of the living God.  As sinful men,
Title:  it is a lesson to us all, because it is a story of the sin,
Title:  hard-heartedness, suddenly awakened fears, the swift punishment,
Title:  repentance, prayers, and finally the deliverance and joy of Jonah.
Title:  As with all sinners among men, the sin of this son of Amittai was in
Title:  his wilful disobedience of the command of God--never mind now what
Title:  that command was, or how conveyed--which he found a hard command.
Title:  But all the things that God would have us do are hard for us to
Title:  do--remember that--and hence, he oftener commands us than endeavors
Title:  to persuade.  And if we obey God, we must disobey ourselves; and it
Title:  is in this disobeying ourselves, wherein the hardness of obeying God
Title:  consists.
Title:  
Title:  "With this sin of disobedience in him, Jonah still further flouts at
Title:  God, by seeking to flee from Him.  He thinks that a ship made by men
Title:  will carry him into countries where God does not reign, but only the
Title:  Captains of this earth.  He skulks about the wharves of Joppa, and
Title:  seeks a ship that's bound for Tarshish.  There lurks, perhaps, a
Title:  hitherto unheeded meaning here.  By all accounts Tarshish could have
Title:  been no other city than the modern Cadiz.  That's the opinion of
Title:  learned men.  And where is Cadiz, shipmates?  Cadiz is in Spain; as
Title:  far by water, from Joppa, as Jonah could possibly have sailed in
Title:  those ancient days, when the Atlantic was an almost unknown sea.
Title:  Because Joppa, the modern Jaffa, shipmates, is on the most easterly
Title:  coast of the Mediterranean, the Syrian; and Tarshish or Cadiz more
Title:  than two thousand miles to the westward from that, just outside the
Title:  Straits of Gibraltar.  See ye not then, shipmates, that Jonah sought
Title:  to flee world-wide from God?  Miserable man!  Oh! most contemptible
Title:  and worthy of all scorn; with slouched hat and guilty eye, skulking
Title:  from his God; prowling among the shipping like a vile burglar
Title:  hastening to cross the seas.  So disordered, self-condemning is his
Title:  look, that had there been policemen in those days, Jonah, on the mere
Title:  suspicion of something wrong, had been arrested ere he touched a
Title:  deck.  How plainly he's a fugitive! no baggage, not a hat-box,
Title:  valise, or carpet-bag,--no friends accompany him to the wharf with
Title:  their adieux.  At last, after much dodging search, he finds the
Title:  Tarshish ship receiving the last items of her cargo; and as he steps
Title:  on board to see its Captain in the cabin, all the sailors for the
Title:  moment desist from hoisting in the goods, to mark the stranger's evil
Title:  eye.  Jonah sees this; but in vain he tries to look all ease and
Title:  confidence; in vain essays his wretched smile.  Strong intuitions of
Title:  the man assure the mariners he can be no innocent.  In their gamesome
Title:  but still serious way, one whispers to the other--"Jack, he's robbed
Title:  a widow;" or, "Joe, do you mark him; he's a bigamist;" or, "Harry
Title:  lad, I guess he's the adulterer that broke jail in old Gomorrah, or
Title:  belike, one of the missing murderers from Sodom."  Another runs to
Title:  read the bill that's stuck against the spile upon the wharf to which
Title:  the ship is moored, offering five hundred gold coins for the
Title:  apprehension of a parricide, and containing a description of his
Title:  person.  He reads, and looks from Jonah to the bill; while all his
Title:  sympathetic shipmates now crowd round Jonah, prepared to lay their
Title:  hands upon him.  Frighted Jonah trembles, and summoning all his
Title:  boldness to his face, only looks so much the more a coward.  He will
Title:  not confess himself suspected; but that itself is strong suspicion.
Title:  So he makes the best of it; and when the sailors find him not to be
Title:  the man that is advertised, they let him pass, and he descends into
Title:  the cabin.
Title:  
Title:  "'Who's there?' cries the Captain at his busy desk, hurriedly making
Title:  out his papers for the Customs--'Who's there?'  Oh! how that harmless
Title:  question mangles Jonah!  For the instant he almost turns to flee
Title:  again.  But he rallies.  'I seek a passage in this ship to Tarshish;
Title:  how soon sail ye, sir?'  Thus far the busy Captain had not looked up
Title:  to Jonah, though the man now stands before him; but no sooner does he
Title:  hear that hollow voice, than he darts a scrutinizing glance.  'We
Title:  sail with the next coming tide,' at last he slowly answered, still
Title:  intently eyeing him.  'No sooner, sir?'--'Soon enough for any honest
Title:  man that goes a passenger.'  Ha!  Jonah, that's another stab.  But he
Title:  swiftly calls away the Captain from that scent.  'I'll sail with
Title:  ye,'--he says,--'the passage money how much is that?--I'll pay now.'
Title:  For it is particularly written, shipmates, as if it were a thing not
Title:  to be overlooked in this history, 'that he paid the fare thereof' ere
Title:  the craft did sail.  And taken with the context, this is full of
Title:  meaning.
Title:  
Title:  "Now Jonah's Captain, shipmates, was one whose discernment detects
Title:  crime in any, but whose cupidity exposes it only in the penniless.
Title:  In this world, shipmates, sin that pays its way can travel freely,
Title:  and without a passport; whereas Virtue, if a pauper, is stopped at
Title:  all frontiers.  So Jonah's Captain prepares to test the length of
Title:  Jonah's purse, ere he judge him openly.  He charges him thrice the
Title:  usual sum; and it's assented to.  Then the Captain knows that Jonah
Title:  is a fugitive; but at the same time resolves to help a flight that
Title:  paves its rear with gold.  Yet when Jonah fairly takes out his purse,
Title:  prudent suspicions still molest the Captain.  He rings every coin to
Title:  find a counterfeit.  Not a forger, any way, he mutters; and Jonah is
Title:  put down for his passage.  'Point out my state-room, Sir,' says Jonah
Title:  now, 'I'm travel-weary; I need sleep.'  'Thou lookest like it,' says
Title:  the Captain, 'there's thy room.'  Jonah enters, and would lock the
Title:  door, but the lock contains no key.  Hearing him foolishly fumbling
Title:  there, the Captain laughs lowly to himself, and mutters something
Title:  about the doors of convicts' cells being never allowed to be locked
Title:  within.  All dressed and dusty as he is, Jonah throws himself into
Title:  his berth, and finds the little state-room ceiling almost resting on
Title:  his forehead.  The air is close, and Jonah gasps.  Then, in that
Title:  contracted hole, sunk, too, beneath the ship's water-line, Jonah
Title:  feels the heralding presentiment of that stifling hour, when the
Title:  whale shall hold him in the smallest of his bowels' wards.
Title:  
Title:  "Screwed at its axis against the side, a swinging lamp slightly
Title:  oscillates in Jonah's room; and the ship, heeling over towards the
Title:  wharf with the weight of the last bales received, the lamp, flame and
Title:  all, though in slight motion, still maintains a permanent obliquity
Title:  with reference to the room; though, in truth, infallibly straight
Title:  itself, it but made obvious the false, lying levels among which it
Title:  hung.  The lamp alarms and frightens Jonah; as lying in his berth his
Title:  tormented eyes roll round the place, and this thus far successful
Title:  fugitive finds no refuge for his restless glance.  But that
Title:  contradiction in the lamp more and more appals him.  The floor, the
Title:  ceiling, and the side, are all awry.  'Oh! so my conscience hangs in
Title:  me!' he groans, 'straight upwards, so it burns; but the chambers of
Title:  my soul are all in crookedness!'
Title:  
Title:  "Like one who after a night of drunken revelry hies to his bed, still
Title:  reeling, but with conscience yet pricking him, as the plungings of
Title:  the Roman race-horse but so much the more strike his steel tags into
Title:  him; as one who in that miserable plight still turns and turns in
Title:  giddy anguish, praying God for annihilation until the fit be passed;
Title:  and at last amid the whirl of woe he feels, a deep stupor steals over
Title:  him, as over the man who bleeds to death, for conscience is the
Title:  wound, and there's naught to staunch it; so, after sore wrestlings in
Title:  his berth, Jonah's prodigy of ponderous misery drags him drowning
Title:  down to sleep.
Title:  
Title:  "And now the time of tide has come; the ship casts off her cables;
Title:  and from the deserted wharf the uncheered ship for Tarshish, all
Title:  careening, glides to sea.  That ship, my friends, was the first of
Title:  recorded smugglers! the contraband was Jonah.  But the sea rebels; he
Title:  will not bear the wicked burden.  A dreadful storm comes on, the
Title:  ship is like to break.  But now when the boatswain calls all hands to
Title:  lighten her; when boxes, bales, and jars are clattering overboard;
Title:  when the wind is shrieking, and the men are yelling, and every plank
Title:  thunders with trampling feet right over Jonah's head; in all this
Title:  raging tumult, Jonah sleeps his hideous sleep.  He sees no black sky
Title:  and raging sea, feels not the reeling timbers, and little hears he or
Title:  heeds he the far rush of the mighty whale, which even now with open
Title:  mouth is cleaving the seas after him.  Aye, shipmates, Jonah was gone
Title:  down into the sides of the ship--a berth in the cabin as I have taken
Title:  it, and was fast asleep.  But the frightened master comes to him, and
Title:  shrieks in his dead ear, 'What meanest thou, O, sleeper! arise!'
Title:  Startled from his lethargy by that direful cry, Jonah staggers to his
Title:  feet, and stumbling to the deck, grasps a shroud, to look out upon
Title:  the sea.  But at that moment he is sprung upon by a panther billow
Title:  leaping over the bulwarks.  Wave after wave thus leaps into the ship,
Title:  and finding no speedy vent runs roaring fore and aft, till the
Title:  mariners come nigh to drowning while yet afloat.  And ever, as the
Title:  white moon shows her affrighted face from the steep gullies in the
Title:  blackness overhead, aghast Jonah sees the rearing bowsprit pointing
Title:  high upward, but soon beat downward again towards the tormented deep.
Title:  
Title:  "Terrors upon terrors run shouting through his soul.  In all his
Title:  cringing attitudes, the God-fugitive is now too plainly known.  The
Title:  sailors mark him; more and more certain grow their suspicions of him,
Title:  and at last, fully to test the truth, by referring the whole matter
Title:  to high Heaven, they fall to casting lots, to see for whose
Title:  cause this great tempest was upon them.  The lot is Jonah's; that
Title:  discovered, then how furiously they mob him with their questions.
Title:  'What is thine occupation?  Whence comest thou?  Thy country?  What
Title:  people?  But mark now, my shipmates, the behavior of poor Jonah.  The
Title:  eager mariners but ask him who he is, and where from; whereas, they
Title:  not only receive an answer to those questions, but likewise another
Title:  answer to a question not put by them, but the unsolicited answer is
Title:  forced from Jonah by the hard hand of God that is upon him.
Title:  
Title:  "'I am a Hebrew,' he cries--and then--'I fear the Lord the God of
Title:  Heaven who hath made the sea and the dry land!'  Fear him, O Jonah?
Title:  Aye, well mightest thou fear the Lord God THEN!  Straightway, he now
Title:  goes on to make a full confession; whereupon the mariners became more
Title:  and more appalled, but still are pitiful.  For when Jonah, not yet
Title:  supplicating God for mercy, since he but too well knew the darkness
Title:  of his deserts,--when wretched Jonah cries out to them to take him
Title:  and cast him forth into the sea, for he knew that for HIS sake this
Title:  great tempest was upon them; they mercifully turn from him, and seek
Title:  by other means to save the ship.  But all in vain; the indignant gale
Title:  howls louder; then, with one hand raised invokingly to God, with the
Title:  other they not unreluctantly lay hold of Jonah.
Title:  
Title:  "And now behold Jonah taken up as an anchor and dropped into the sea;
Title:  when instantly an oily calmness floats out from the east, and the sea
Title:  is still, as Jonah carries down the gale with him, leaving smooth
Title:  water behind.  He goes down in the whirling heart of such a
Title:  masterless commotion that he scarce heeds the moment when he drops
Title:  seething into the yawning jaws awaiting him; and the whale shoots-to
Title:  all his ivory teeth, like so many white bolts, upon his prison.  Then
Title:  Jonah prayed unto the Lord out of the fish's belly.  But observe his
Title:  prayer, and learn a weighty lesson.  For sinful as he is, Jonah does
Title:  not weep and wail for direct deliverance.  He feels that his dreadful
Title:  punishment is just.  He leaves all his deliverance to God, contenting
Title:  himself with this, that spite of all his pains and pangs, he will
Title:  still look towards His holy temple.  And here, shipmates, is true and
Title:  faithful repentance; not clamorous for pardon, but grateful for
Title:  punishment.  And how pleasing to God was this conduct in Jonah, is
Title:  shown in the eventual deliverance of him from the sea and the whale.
Title:  Shipmates, I do not place Jonah before you to be copied for his sin
Title:  but I do place him before you as a model for repentance.  Sin not;
Title:  but if you do, take heed to repent of it like Jonah."
Title:  
Title:  While he was speaking these words, the howling of the shrieking,
Title:  slanting storm without seemed to add new power to the preacher, who,
Title:  when describing Jonah's sea-storm, seemed tossed by a storm himself.
Title:  His deep chest heaved as with a ground-swell; his tossed arms seemed
Title:  the warring elements at work; and the thunders that rolled away from
Title:  off his swarthy brow, and the light leaping from his eye, made all
Title:  his simple hearers look on him with a quick fear that was strange to
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  There now came a lull in his look, as he silently turned over the
Title:  leaves of the Book once more; and, at last, standing motionless, with
Title:  closed eyes, for the moment, seemed communing with God and himself.
Title:  
Title:  But again he leaned over towards the people, and bowing his head
Title:  lowly, with an aspect of the deepest yet manliest humility, he spake
Title:  these words:
Title:  
Title:  "Shipmates, God has laid but one hand upon you; both his hands press
Title:  upon me.  I have read ye by what murky light may be mine the lesson
Title:  that Jonah teaches to all sinners; and therefore to ye, and still
Title:  more to me, for I am a greater sinner than ye.  And now how gladly
Title:  would I come down from this mast-head and sit on the hatches there
Title:  where you sit, and listen as you listen, while some one of you reads
Title:  ME that other and more awful lesson which Jonah teaches to ME, as a
Title:  pilot of the living God.  How being an anointed pilot-prophet, or
Title:  speaker of true things, and bidden by the Lord to sound those
Title:  unwelcome truths in the ears of a wicked Nineveh, Jonah, appalled at
Title:  the hostility he should raise, fled from his mission, and sought to
Title:  escape his duty and his God by taking ship at Joppa.  But God is
Title:  everywhere; Tarshish he never reached.  As we have seen, God came
Title:  upon him in the whale, and swallowed him down to living gulfs of
Title:  doom, and with swift slantings tore him along 'into the midst of the
Title:  seas,' where the eddying depths sucked him ten thousand fathoms down,
Title:  and 'the weeds were wrapped about his head,' and all the watery world
Title:  of woe bowled over him.  Yet even then beyond the reach of any
Title:  plummet--'out of the belly of hell'--when the whale grounded upon the
Title:  ocean's utmost bones, even then, God heard the engulphed, repenting
Title:  prophet when he cried.  Then God spake unto the fish; and from the
Title:  shuddering cold and blackness of the sea, the whale came breeching up
Title:  towards the warm and pleasant sun, and all the delights of air and
Title:  earth; and 'vomited out Jonah upon the dry land;' when the word of
Title:  the Lord came a second time; and Jonah, bruised and beaten--his ears,
Title:  like two sea-shells, still multitudinously murmuring of the
Title:  ocean--Jonah did the Almighty's bidding.  And what was that,
Title:  shipmates?  To preach the Truth to the face of Falsehood!  That was
Title:  it!
Title:  
Title:  "This, shipmates, this is that other lesson; and woe to that pilot of
Title:  the living God who slights it.  Woe to him whom this world charms
Title:  from Gospel duty!  Woe to him who seeks to pour oil upon the waters
Title:  when God has brewed them into a gale!  Woe to him who seeks to please
Title:  rather than to appal!  Woe to him whose good name is more to him than
Title:  goodness!  Woe to him who, in this world, courts not dishonour!  Woe
Title:  to him who would not be true, even though to be false were salvation!
Title:  Yea, woe to him who, as the great Pilot Paul has it, while preaching
Title:  to others is himself a castaway!"
Title:  
Title:  He dropped and fell away from himself for a moment; then lifting his
Title:  face to them again, showed a deep joy in his eyes, as he cried out
Title:  with a heavenly enthusiasm,--"But oh! shipmates! on the starboard
Title:  hand of every woe, there is a sure delight; and higher the top of
Title:  that delight, than the bottom of the woe is deep.  Is not the
Title:  main-truck higher than the kelson is low?  Delight is to him--a far,
Title:  far upward, and inward delight--who against the proud gods and
Title:  commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own inexorable self.
Title:  Delight is to him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of
Title:  this base treacherous world has gone down beneath him.  Delight is to
Title:  him, who gives no quarter in the truth, and kills, burns, and
Title:  destroys all sin though he pluck it out from under the robes of
Title:  Senators and Judges.  Delight,--top-gallant delight is to him, who
Title:  acknowledges no law or lord, but the Lord his God, and is only a
Title:  patriot to heaven.  Delight is to him, whom all the waves of the
Title:  billows of the seas of the boisterous mob can never shake from this
Title:  sure Keel of the Ages.  And eternal delight and deliciousness will be
Title:  his, who coming to lay him down, can say with his final breath--O
Title:  Father!--chiefly known to me by Thy rod--mortal or immortal, here I
Title:  die.  I have striven to be Thine, more than to be this world's, or
Title:  mine own.  Yet this is nothing: I leave eternity to Thee; for what
Title:  is man that he should live out the lifetime of his God?"
Title:  
Title:  He said no more, but slowly waving a benediction, covered his face
Title:  with his hands, and so remained kneeling, till all the people had
Title:  departed, and he was left alone in the place.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 10
Title:  
Title:  A Bosom Friend.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Returning to the Spouter-Inn from the Chapel, I found Queequeg there
Title:  quite alone; he having left the Chapel before the benediction some
Title:  time.  He was sitting on a bench before the fire, with his feet on
Title:  the stove hearth, and in one hand was holding close up to his face
Title:  that little negro idol of his; peering hard into its face, and with a
Title:  jack-knife gently whittling away at its nose, meanwhile humming to
Title:  himself in his heathenish way.
Title:  
Title:  But being now interrupted, he put up the image; and pretty soon,
Title:  going to the table, took up a large book there, and placing it on his
Title:  lap began counting the pages with deliberate regularity; at every
Title:  fiftieth page--as I fancied--stopping a moment, looking vacantly
Title:  around him, and giving utterance to a long-drawn gurgling whistle of
Title:  astonishment.  He would then begin again at the next fifty; seeming
Title:  to commence at number one each time, as though he could not count
Title:  more than fifty, and it was only by such a large number of fifties
Title:  being found together, that his astonishment at the multitude of pages
Title:  was excited.
Title:  
Title:  With much interest I sat watching him.  Savage though he was, and
Title:  hideously marred about the face--at least to my taste--his
Title:  countenance yet had a something in it which was by no means
Title:  disagreeable.  You cannot hide the soul.  Through all his unearthly
Title:  tattooings, I thought I saw the traces of a simple honest heart; and
Title:  in his large, deep eyes, fiery black and bold, there seemed tokens of
Title:  a spirit that would dare a thousand devils.  And besides all this,
Title:  there was a certain lofty bearing about the Pagan, which even his
Title:  uncouthness could not altogether maim.  He looked like a man who had
Title:  never cringed and never had had a creditor.  Whether it was, too,
Title:  that his head being shaved, his forehead was drawn out in freer and
Title:  brighter relief, and looked more expansive than it otherwise would,
Title:  this I will not venture to decide; but certain it was his head was
Title:  phrenologically an excellent one.  It may seem ridiculous, but it
Title:  reminded me of General Washington's head, as seen in the popular
Title:  busts of him.  It had the same long regularly graded retreating slope
Title:  from above the brows, which were likewise very projecting, like two
Title:  long promontories thickly wooded on top.  Queequeg was George
Title:  Washington cannibalistically developed.
Title:  
Title:  Whilst I was thus closely scanning him, half-pretending meanwhile to
Title:  be looking out at the storm from the casement, he never heeded my
Title:  presence, never troubled himself with so much as a single glance; but
Title:  appeared wholly occupied with counting the pages of the marvellous
Title:  book.  Considering how sociably we had been sleeping together the
Title:  night previous, and especially considering the affectionate arm I had
Title:  found thrown over me upon waking in the morning, I thought this
Title:  indifference of his very strange.  But savages are strange beings; at
Title:  times you do not know exactly how to take them.  At first they are
Title:  overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a
Title:  Socratic wisdom.  I had noticed also that Queequeg never consorted at
Title:  all, or but very little, with the other seamen in the inn.  He made
Title:  no advances whatever; appeared to have no desire to enlarge the
Title:  circle of his acquaintances.  All this struck me as mighty singular;
Title:  yet, upon second thoughts, there was something almost sublime in it.
Title:  Here was a man some twenty thousand miles from home, by the way of
Title:  Cape Horn, that is--which was the only way he could get there--thrown
Title:  among people as strange to him as though he were in the planet
Title:  Jupiter; and yet he seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the
Title:  utmost serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to
Title:  himself.  Surely this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt
Title:  he had never heard there was such a thing as that.  But, perhaps, to
Title:  be true philosophers, we mortals should not be conscious of so living
Title:  or so striving.  So soon as I hear that such or such a man gives
Title:  himself out for a philosopher, I conclude that, like the dyspeptic
Title:  old woman, he must have "broken his digester."
Title:  
Title:  As I sat there in that now lonely room; the fire burning low, in that
Title:  mild stage when, after its first intensity has warmed the air, it
Title:  then only glows to be looked at; the evening shades and phantoms
Title:  gathering round the casements, and peering in upon us silent,
Title:  solitary twain; the storm booming without in solemn swells; I began
Title:  to be sensible of strange feelings.  I felt a melting in me.  No more
Title:  my splintered heart and maddened hand were turned against the wolfish
Title:  world.  This soothing savage had redeemed it.  There he sat, his very
Title:  indifference speaking a nature in which there lurked no civilized
Title:  hypocrisies and bland deceits.  Wild he was; a very sight of sights
Title:  to see; yet I began to feel myself mysteriously drawn towards him.
Title:  And those same things that would have repelled most others, they were
Title:  the very magnets that thus drew me.  I'll try a pagan friend, thought
Title:  I, since Christian kindness has proved but hollow courtesy.  I drew
Title:  my bench near him, and made some friendly signs and hints, doing my
Title:  best to talk with him meanwhile.  At first he little noticed these
Title:  advances; but presently, upon my referring to his last night's
Title:  hospitalities, he made out to ask me whether we were again to be
Title:  bedfellows.  I told him yes; whereat I thought he looked pleased,
Title:  perhaps a little complimented.
Title:  
Title:  We then turned over the book together, and I endeavored to explain to
Title:  him the purpose of the printing, and the meaning of the few pictures
Title:  that were in it.  Thus I soon engaged his interest; and from that we
Title:  went to jabbering the best we could about the various outer sights to
Title:  be seen in this famous town.  Soon I proposed a social smoke; and,
Title:  producing his pouch and tomahawk, he quietly offered me a puff.  And
Title:  then we sat exchanging puffs from that wild pipe of his, and keeping
Title:  it regularly passing between us.
Title:  
Title:  If there yet lurked any ice of indifference towards me in the Pagan's
Title:  breast, this pleasant, genial smoke we had, soon thawed it out, and
Title:  left us cronies.  He seemed to take to me quite as naturally and
Title:  unbiddenly as I to him; and when our smoke was over, he pressed his
Title:  forehead against mine, clasped me round the waist, and said that
Title:  henceforth we were married; meaning, in his country's phrase, that we
Title:  were bosom friends; he would gladly die for me, if need should be.
Title:  In a countryman, this sudden flame of friendship would have seemed
Title:  far too premature, a thing to be much distrusted; but in this simple
Title:  savage those old rules would not apply.
Title:  
Title:  After supper, and another social chat and smoke, we went to our room
Title:  together.  He made me a present of his embalmed head; took out his
Title:  enormous tobacco wallet, and groping under the tobacco, drew out some
Title:  thirty dollars in silver; then spreading them on the table, and
Title:  mechanically dividing them into two equal portions, pushed one of
Title:  them towards me, and said it was mine.  I was going to remonstrate;
Title:  but he silenced me by pouring them into my trowsers' pockets.  I let
Title:  them stay.  He then went about his evening prayers, took out his
Title:  idol, and removed the paper fireboard.  By certain signs and
Title:  symptoms, I thought he seemed anxious for me to join him; but well
Title:  knowing what was to follow, I deliberated a moment whether, in case
Title:  he invited me, I would comply or otherwise.
Title:  
Title:  I was a good Christian; born and bred in the bosom of the infallible
Title:  Presbyterian Church.  How then could I unite with this wild idolator
Title:  in worshipping his piece of wood?  But what is worship? thought I.
Title:  Do you suppose now, Ishmael, that the magnanimous God of heaven and
Title:  earth--pagans and all included--can possibly be jealous of an
Title:  insignificant bit of black wood?  Impossible!  But what is
Title:  worship?--to do the will of God--THAT is worship.  And what is the
Title:  will of God?--to do to my fellow man what I would have my fellow man
Title:  to do to me--THAT is the will of God.  Now, Queequeg is my fellow
Title:  man.  And what do I wish that this Queequeg would do to me?  Why,
Title:  unite with me in my particular Presbyterian form of worship.
Title:  Consequently, I must then unite with him in his; ergo, I must turn
Title:  idolator.  So I kindled the shavings; helped prop up the innocent
Title:  little idol; offered him burnt biscuit with Queequeg; salamed before
Title:  him twice or thrice; kissed his nose; and that done, we undressed and
Title:  went to bed, at peace with our own consciences and all the world.
Title:  But we did not go to sleep without some little chat.
Title:  
Title:  How it is I know not; but there is no place like a bed for
Title:  confidential disclosures between friends.  Man and wife, they say,
Title:  there open the very bottom of their souls to each other; and some old
Title:  couples often lie and chat over old times till nearly morning.  Thus,
Title:  then, in our hearts' honeymoon, lay I and Queequeg--a cosy, loving
Title:  pair.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 11
Title:  
Title:  Nightgown.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  We had lain thus in bed, chatting and napping at short intervals, and
Title:  Queequeg now and then affectionately throwing his brown tattooed legs
Title:  over mine, and then drawing them back; so entirely sociable and free
Title:  and easy were we; when, at last, by reason of our confabulations,
Title:  what little nappishness remained in us altogether departed, and we
Title:  felt like getting up again, though day-break was yet some way down
Title:  the future.
Title:  
Title:  Yes, we became very wakeful; so much so that our recumbent position
Title:  began to grow wearisome, and by little and little we found ourselves
Title:  sitting up; the clothes well tucked around us, leaning against the
Title:  head-board with our four knees drawn up close together, and our two
Title:  noses bending over them, as if our kneepans were warming-pans.  We
Title:  felt very nice and snug, the more so since it was so chilly out of
Title:  doors; indeed out of bed-clothes too, seeing that there was no fire
Title:  in the room.  The more so, I say, because truly to enjoy bodily
Title:  warmth, some small part of you must be cold, for there is no quality
Title:  in this world that is not what it is merely by contrast.  Nothing
Title:  exists in itself.  If you flatter yourself that you are all over
Title:  comfortable, and have been so a long time, then you cannot be said to
Title:  be comfortable any more.  But if, like Queequeg and me in the bed,
Title:  the tip of your nose or the crown of your head be slightly chilled,
Title:  why then, indeed, in the general consciousness you feel most
Title:  delightfully and unmistakably warm.  For this reason a sleeping
Title:  apartment should never be furnished with a fire, which is one of the
Title:  luxurious discomforts of the rich.  For the height of this sort of
Title:  deliciousness is to have nothing but the blanket between you and
Title:  your snugness and the cold of the outer air.  Then there you lie like
Title:  the one warm spark in the heart of an arctic crystal.
Title:  
Title:  We had been sitting in this crouching manner for some time, when all
Title:  at once I thought I would open my eyes; for when between sheets,
Title:  whether by day or by night, and whether asleep or awake, I have a way
Title:  of always keeping my eyes shut, in order the more to concentrate the
Title:  snugness of being in bed.  Because no man can ever feel his own
Title:  identity aright except his eyes be closed; as if darkness were
Title:  indeed the proper element of our essences, though light be more
Title:  congenial to our clayey part.  Upon opening my eyes then, and coming
Title:  out of my own pleasant and self-created darkness into the imposed and
Title:  coarse outer gloom of the unilluminated twelve-o'clock-at-night, I
Title:  experienced a disagreeable revulsion.  Nor did I at all object to the
Title:  hint from Queequeg that perhaps it were best to strike a light,
Title:  seeing that we were so wide awake; and besides he felt a strong
Title:  desire to have a few quiet puffs from his Tomahawk.  Be it said, that
Title:  though I had felt such a strong repugnance to his smoking in the bed
Title:  the night before, yet see how elastic our stiff prejudices grow when
Title:  love once comes to bend them.  For now I liked nothing better than
Title:  to have Queequeg smoking by me, even in bed, because he seemed to be
Title:  full of such serene household joy then.  I no more felt unduly
Title:  concerned for the landlord's policy of insurance.  I was only alive
Title:  to the condensed confidential comfortableness of sharing a pipe and a
Title:  blanket with a real friend.  With our shaggy jackets drawn about our
Title:  shoulders, we now passed the Tomahawk from one to the other, till
Title:  slowly there grew over us a blue hanging tester of smoke, illuminated
Title:  by the flame of the new-lit lamp.
Title:  
Title:  Whether it was that this undulating tester rolled the savage away to
Title:  far distant scenes, I know not, but he now spoke of his native
Title:  island; and, eager to hear his history, I begged him to go on and
Title:  tell it.  He gladly complied.  Though at the time I but ill
Title:  comprehended not a few of his words, yet subsequent disclosures, when
Title:  I had become more familiar with his broken phraseology, now enable me
Title:  to present the whole story such as it may prove in the mere skeleton
Title:  I give.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 12
Title:  
Title:  Biographical.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Queequeg was a native of Rokovoko, an island far away to the West
Title:  and South.  It is not down in any map; true places never are.
Title:  
Title:  When a new-hatched savage running wild about his native woodlands in
Title:  a grass clout, followed by the nibbling goats, as if he were a green
Title:  sapling; even then, in Queequeg's ambitious soul, lurked a strong
Title:  desire to see something more of Christendom than a specimen whaler or
Title:  two.  His father was a High Chief, a King; his uncle a High Priest;
Title:  and on the maternal side he boasted aunts who were the wives of
Title:  unconquerable warriors.  There was excellent blood in his
Title:  veins--royal stuff; though sadly vitiated, I fear, by the cannibal
Title:  propensity he nourished in his untutored youth.
Title:  
Title:  A Sag Harbor ship visited his father's bay, and Queequeg sought a
Title:  passage to Christian lands.  But the ship, having her full complement
Title:  of seamen, spurned his suit; and not all the King his father's
Title:  influence could prevail.  But Queequeg vowed a vow.  Alone in his
Title:  canoe, he paddled off to a distant strait, which he knew the ship
Title:  must pass through when she quitted the island.  On one side was a
Title:  coral reef; on the other a low tongue of land, covered with mangrove
Title:  thickets that grew out into the water.  Hiding his canoe, still
Title:  afloat, among these thickets, with its prow seaward, he sat down in
Title:  the stern, paddle low in hand; and when the ship was gliding by, like
Title:  a flash he darted out; gained her side; with one backward dash of his
Title:  foot capsized and sank his canoe; climbed up the chains; and throwing
Title:  himself at full length upon the deck, grappled a ring-bolt there, and
Title:  swore not to let it go, though hacked in pieces.
Title:  
Title:  In vain the captain threatened to throw him overboard; suspended a
Title:  cutlass over his naked wrists; Queequeg was the son of a King, and
Title:  Queequeg budged not.  Struck by his desperate dauntlessness, and his
Title:  wild desire to visit Christendom, the captain at last relented, and
Title:  told him he might make himself at home.  But this fine young
Title:  savage--this sea Prince of Wales, never saw the Captain's cabin.
Title:  They put him down among the sailors, and made a whaleman of him.  But
Title:  like Czar Peter content to toil in the shipyards of foreign cities,
Title:  Queequeg disdained no seeming ignominy, if thereby he might happily
Title:  gain the power of enlightening his untutored countrymen.  For at
Title:  bottom--so he told me--he was actuated by a profound desire to learn
Title:  among the Christians, the arts whereby to make his people still
Title:  happier than they were; and more than that, still better than they
Title:  were.  But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon convinced him that
Title:  even Christians could be both miserable and wicked; infinitely more
Title:  so, than all his father's heathens.  Arrived at last in old Sag
Title:  Harbor; and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to
Title:  Nantucket, and seeing how they spent their wages in that place also,
Title:  poor Queequeg gave it up for lost.  Thought he, it's a wicked world
Title:  in all meridians; I'll die a pagan.
Title:  
Title:  And thus an old idolator at heart, he yet lived among these
Title:  Christians, wore their clothes, and tried to talk their gibberish.
Title:  Hence the queer ways about him, though now some time from home.
Title:  
Title:  By hints, I asked him whether he did not propose going back, and
Title:  having a coronation; since he might now consider his father dead and
Title:  gone, he being very old and feeble at the last accounts.  He answered
Title:  no, not yet; and added that he was fearful Christianity, or rather
Title:  Christians, had unfitted him for ascending the pure and undefiled
Title:  throne of thirty pagan Kings before him.  But by and by, he said, he
Title:  would return,--as soon as he felt himself baptized again.  For the
Title:  nonce, however, he proposed to sail about, and sow his wild oats in
Title:  all four oceans.  They had made a harpooneer of him, and that barbed
Title:  iron was in lieu of a sceptre now.
Title:  
Title:  I asked him what might be his immediate purpose, touching his future
Title:  movements.  He answered, to go to sea again, in his old vocation.
Title:  Upon this, I told him that whaling was my own design, and informed
Title:  him of my intention to sail out of Nantucket, as being the most
Title:  promising port for an adventurous whaleman to embark from.  He at
Title:  once resolved to accompany me to that island, ship aboard the same
Title:  vessel, get into the same watch, the same boat, the same mess with
Title:  me, in short to share my every hap; with both my hands in his, boldly
Title:  dip into the Potluck of both worlds.  To all this I joyously
Title:  assented; for besides the affection I now felt for Queequeg, he was
Title:  an experienced harpooneer, and as such, could not fail to be of great
Title:  usefulness to one, who, like me, was wholly ignorant of the mysteries
Title:  of whaling, though well acquainted with the sea, as known to merchant
Title:  seamen.
Title:  
Title:  His story being ended with his pipe's last dying puff, Queequeg
Title:  embraced me, pressed his forehead against mine, and blowing out the
Title:  light, we rolled over from each other, this way and that, and very
Title:  soon were sleeping.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 13
Title:  
Title:  Wheelbarrow.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Next morning, Monday, after disposing of the embalmed head to a
Title:  barber, for a block, I settled my own and comrade's bill; using,
Title:  however, my comrade's money.  The grinning landlord, as well as the
Title:  boarders, seemed amazingly tickled at the sudden friendship which had
Title:  sprung up between me and Queequeg--especially as Peter Coffin's cock
Title:  and bull stories about him had previously so much alarmed me
Title:  concerning the very person whom I now companied with.
Title:  
Title:  We borrowed a wheelbarrow, and embarking our things, including my own
Title:  poor carpet-bag, and Queequeg's canvas sack and hammock, away we went
Title:  down to "the Moss," the little Nantucket packet schooner moored at
Title:  the wharf.  As we were going along the people stared; not at Queequeg
Title:  so much--for they were used to seeing cannibals like him in their
Title:  streets,--but at seeing him and me upon such confidential terms.  But
Title:  we heeded them not, going along wheeling the barrow by turns, and
Title:  Queequeg now and then stopping to adjust the sheath on his harpoon
Title:  barbs.  I asked him why he carried such a troublesome thing with him
Title:  ashore, and whether all whaling ships did not find their own
Title:  harpoons.  To this, in substance, he replied, that though what I
Title:  hinted was true enough, yet he had a particular affection for his own
Title:  harpoon, because it was of assured stuff, well tried in many a mortal
Title:  combat, and deeply intimate with the hearts of whales.  In short,
Title:  like many inland reapers and mowers, who go into the farmers' meadows
Title:  armed with their own scythes--though in no wise obliged to furnish
Title:  them--even so, Queequeg, for his own private reasons, preferred his
Title:  own harpoon.
Title:  
Title:  Shifting the barrow from my hand to his, he told me a funny story
Title:  about the first wheelbarrow he had ever seen.  It was in Sag Harbor.
Title:  The owners of his ship, it seems, had lent him one, in which to carry
Title:  his heavy chest to his boarding house.  Not to seem ignorant about
Title:  the thing--though in truth he was entirely so, concerning the precise
Title:  way in which to manage the barrow--Queequeg puts his chest upon it;
Title:  lashes it fast; and then shoulders the barrow and marches up the
Title:  wharf.  "Why," said I, "Queequeg, you might have known better than
Title:  that, one would think.  Didn't the people laugh?"
Title:  
Title:  Upon this, he told me another story.  The people of his island of
Title:  Rokovoko, it seems, at their wedding feasts express the fragrant
Title:  water of young cocoanuts into a large stained calabash like a
Title:  punchbowl; and this punchbowl always forms the great central ornament
Title:  on the braided mat where the feast is held.  Now a certain grand
Title:  merchant ship once touched at Rokovoko, and its commander--from all
Title:  accounts, a very stately punctilious gentleman, at least for a sea
Title:  captain--this commander was invited to the wedding feast of
Title:  Queequeg's sister, a pretty young princess just turned of ten.  Well;
Title:  when all the wedding guests were assembled at the bride's bamboo
Title:  cottage, this Captain marches in, and being assigned the post of
Title:  honour, placed himself over against the punchbowl, and between the
Title:  High Priest and his majesty the King, Queequeg's father.  Grace being
Title:  said,--for those people have their grace as well as we--though
Title:  Queequeg told me that unlike us, who at such times look downwards to
Title:  our platters, they, on the contrary, copying the ducks, glance
Title:  upwards to the great Giver of all feasts--Grace, I say, being said,
Title:  the High Priest opens the banquet by the immemorial ceremony of the
Title:  island; that is, dipping his consecrated and consecrating fingers
Title:  into the bowl before the blessed beverage circulates.  Seeing himself
Title:  placed next the Priest, and noting the ceremony, and thinking
Title:  himself--being Captain of a ship--as having plain precedence over a
Title:  mere island King, especially in the King's own house--the Captain
Title:  coolly proceeds to wash his hands in the punchbowl;--taking it I
Title:  suppose for a huge finger-glass.  "Now," said Queequeg, "what you
Title:  tink now?--Didn't our people laugh?"
Title:  
Title:  At last, passage paid, and luggage safe, we stood on board the
Title:  schooner.  Hoisting sail, it glided down the Acushnet river.  On one
Title:  side, New Bedford rose in terraces of streets, their ice-covered
Title:  trees all glittering in the clear, cold air.  Huge hills and
Title:  mountains of casks on casks were piled upon her wharves, and side by
Title:  side the world-wandering whale ships lay silent and safely moored at
Title:  last; while from others came a sound of carpenters and coopers, with
Title:  blended noises of fires and forges to melt the pitch, all betokening
Title:  that new cruises were on the start; that one most perilous and long
Title:  voyage ended, only begins a second; and a second ended, only begins a
Title:  third, and so on, for ever and for aye.  Such is the endlessness,
Title:  yea, the intolerableness of all earthly effort.
Title:  
Title:  Gaining the more open water, the bracing breeze waxed fresh; the
Title:  little Moss tossed the quick foam from her bows, as a young colt his
Title:  snortings.  How I snuffed that Tartar air!--how I spurned that
Title:  turnpike earth!--that common highway all over dented with the marks
Title:  of slavish heels and hoofs; and turned me to admire the magnanimity
Title:  of the sea which will permit no records.
Title:  
Title:  At the same foam-fountain, Queequeg seemed to drink and reel with me.
Title:  His dusky nostrils swelled apart; he showed his filed and pointed
Title:  teeth.  On, on we flew; and our offing gained, the Moss did homage to
Title:  the blast; ducked and dived her bows as a slave before the Sultan.
Title:  Sideways leaning, we sideways darted; every ropeyarn tingling like a
Title:  wire; the two tall masts buckling like Indian canes in land
Title:  tornadoes.  So full of this reeling scene were we, as we stood by the
Title:  plunging bowsprit, that for some time we did not notice the jeering
Title:  glances of the passengers, a lubber-like assembly, who marvelled that
Title:  two fellow beings should be so companionable; as though a white man
Title:  were anything more dignified than a whitewashed negro.  But there
Title:  were some boobies and bumpkins there, who, by their intense
Title:  greenness, must have come from the heart and centre of all verdure.
Title:  Queequeg caught one of these young saplings mimicking him behind his
Title:  back.  I thought the bumpkin's hour of doom was come.  Dropping his
Title:  harpoon, the brawny savage caught him in his arms, and by an almost
Title:  miraculous dexterity and strength, sent him high up bodily into the
Title:  air; then slightly tapping his stern in mid-somerset, the fellow
Title:  landed with bursting lungs upon his feet, while Queequeg, turning his
Title:  back upon him, lighted his tomahawk pipe and passed it to me for a
Title:  puff.
Title:  
Title:  "Capting!  Capting! yelled the bumpkin, running towards that officer;
Title:  "Capting, Capting, here's the devil."
Title:  
Title:  "Hallo, YOU sir," cried the Captain, a gaunt rib of the sea, stalking
Title:  up to Queequeg, "what in thunder do you mean by that?  Don't you know
Title:  you might have killed that chap?"
Title:  
Title:  "What him say?" said Queequeg, as he mildly turned to me.
Title:  
Title:  "He say," said I, "that you came near kill-e that man there,"
Title:  pointing to the still shivering greenhorn.
Title:  
Title:  "Kill-e," cried Queequeg, twisting his tattooed face into an
Title:  unearthly expression of disdain, "ah! him bevy small-e fish-e;
Title:  Queequeg no kill-e so small-e fish-e; Queequeg kill-e big whale!"
Title:  
Title:  "Look you," roared the Captain, "I'll kill-e YOU, you cannibal, if
Title:  you try any more of your tricks aboard here; so mind your eye."
Title:  
Title:  But it so happened just then, that it was high time for the Captain
Title:  to mind his own eye.  The prodigious strain upon the main-sail had
Title:  parted the weather-sheet, and the tremendous boom was now flying from
Title:  side to side, completely sweeping the entire after part of the deck.
Title:  The poor fellow whom Queequeg had handled so roughly, was swept
Title:  overboard; all hands were in a panic; and to attempt snatching at the
Title:  boom to stay it, seemed madness.  It flew from right to left, and
Title:  back again, almost in one ticking of a watch, and every instant
Title:  seemed on the point of snapping into splinters.  Nothing was done,
Title:  and nothing seemed capable of being done; those on deck rushed
Title:  towards the bows, and stood eyeing the boom as if it were the lower
Title:  jaw of an exasperated whale.  In the midst of this consternation,
Title:  Queequeg dropped deftly to his knees, and crawling under the path of
Title:  the boom, whipped hold of a rope, secured one end to the bulwarks,
Title:  and then flinging the other like a lasso, caught it round the boom as
Title:  it swept over his head, and at the next jerk, the spar was that way
Title:  trapped, and all was safe.  The schooner was run into the wind, and
Title:  while the hands were clearing away the stern boat, Queequeg, stripped
Title:  to the waist, darted from the side with a long living arc of a leap.
Title:  For three minutes or more he was seen swimming like a dog, throwing
Title:  his long arms straight out before him, and by turns revealing his
Title:  brawny shoulders through the freezing foam.  I looked at the grand
Title:  and glorious fellow, but saw no one to be saved.  The greenhorn had
Title:  gone down.  Shooting himself perpendicularly from the water,
Title:  Queequeg, now took an instant's glance around him, and seeming to see
Title:  just how matters were, dived down and disappeared.  A few minutes
Title:  more, and he rose again, one arm still striking out, and with the
Title:  other dragging a lifeless form.  The boat soon picked them up.  The
Title:  poor bumpkin was restored.  All hands voted Queequeg a noble trump;
Title:  the captain begged his pardon.  From that hour I clove to Queequeg
Title:  like a barnacle; yea, till poor Queequeg took his last long dive.
Title:  
Title:  Was there ever such unconsciousness?  He did not seem to think that
Title:  he at all deserved a medal from the Humane and Magnanimous Societies.
Title:  He only asked for water--fresh water--something to wipe the brine
Title:  off; that done, he put on dry clothes, lighted his pipe, and leaning
Title:  against the bulwarks, and mildly eyeing those around him, seemed to
Title:  be saying to himself--"It's a mutual, joint-stock world, in all
Title:  meridians.  We cannibals must help these Christians."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 14
Title:  
Title:  Nantucket.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning; so, after
Title:  a fine run, we safely arrived in Nantucket.
Title:  
Title:  Nantucket!  Take out your map and look at it.  See what a real corner
Title:  of the world it occupies; how it stands there, away off shore, more
Title:  lonely than the Eddystone lighthouse.  Look at it--a mere hillock,
Title:  and elbow of sand; all beach, without a background.  There is more
Title:  sand there than you would use in twenty years as a substitute for
Title:  blotting paper.  Some gamesome wights will tell you that they have to
Title:  plant weeds there, they don't grow naturally; that they import Canada
Title:  thistles; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop a
Title:  leak in an oil cask; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried
Title:  about like bits of the true cross in Rome; that people there plant
Title:  toadstools before their houses, to get under the shade in summer
Title:  time; that one blade of grass makes an oasis, three blades in a day's
Title:  walk a prairie; that they wear quicksand shoes, something like
Title:  Laplander snow-shoes; that they are so shut up, belted about, every
Title:  way inclosed, surrounded, and made an utter island of by the ocean,
Title:  that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes be
Title:  found adhering, as to the backs of sea turtles.  But these
Title:  extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.
Title:  
Title:  Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was
Title:  settled by the red-men.  Thus goes the legend.  In olden times an
Title:  eagle swooped down upon the New England coast, and carried off an
Title:  infant Indian in his talons.  With loud lament the parents saw their
Title:  child borne out of sight over the wide waters.  They resolved to
Title:  follow in the same direction.  Setting out in their canoes, after a
Title:  perilous passage they discovered the island, and there they found an
Title:  empty ivory casket,--the poor little Indian's skeleton.
Title:  
Title:  What wonder, then, that these Nantucketers, born on a beach, should
Title:  take to the sea for a livelihood!  They first caught crabs and
Title:  quohogs in the sand; grown bolder, they waded out with nets for
Title:  mackerel; more experienced, they pushed off in boats and captured
Title:  cod; and at last, launching a navy of great ships on the sea,
Title:  explored this watery world; put an incessant belt of
Title:  circumnavigations round it; peeped in at Behring's Straits; and in
Title:  all seasons and all oceans declared everlasting war with the
Title:  mightiest animated mass that has survived the flood; most monstrous
Title:  and most mountainous!  That Himmalehan, salt-sea Mastodon, clothed
Title:  with such portentousness of unconscious power, that his very panics
Title:  are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious assaults!
Title:  
Title:  And thus have these naked Nantucketers, these sea hermits, issuing
Title:  from their ant-hill in the sea, overrun and conquered the watery
Title:  world like so many Alexanders; parcelling out among them the
Title:  Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans, as the three pirate powers did
Title:  Poland.  Let America add Mexico to Texas, and pile Cuba upon Canada;
Title:  let the English overswarm all India, and hang out their blazing
Title:  banner from the sun; two thirds of this terraqueous globe are the
Title:  Nantucketer's.  For the sea is his; he owns it, as Emperors own
Title:  empires; other seamen having but a right of way through it.  Merchant
Title:  ships are but extension bridges; armed ones but floating forts; even
Title:  pirates and privateers, though following the sea as highwaymen the
Title:  road, they but plunder other ships, other fragments of the land like
Title:  themselves, without seeking to draw their living from the bottomless
Title:  deep itself.  The Nantucketer, he alone resides and riots on the sea;
Title:  he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in ships; to and fro
Title:  ploughing it as his own special plantation.  THERE is his home; THERE
Title:  lies his business, which a Noah's flood would not interrupt, though
Title:  it overwhelmed all the millions in China.  He lives on the sea, as
Title:  prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs
Title:  them as chamois hunters climb the Alps.  For years he knows not the
Title:  land; so that when he comes to it at last, it smells like another
Title:  world, more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman.  With the
Title:  landless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep
Title:  between billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out of sight of
Title:  land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, while under his very
Title:  pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 15
Title:  
Title:  Chowder.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to
Title:  anchor, and Queequeg and I went ashore; so we could attend to no
Title:  business that day, at least none but a supper and a bed.  The
Title:  landlord of the Spouter-Inn had recommended us to his cousin Hosea
Title:  Hussey of the Try Pots, whom he asserted to be the proprietor of one
Title:  of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket, and moreover he had assured
Title:  us that Cousin Hosea, as he called him, was famous for his chowders.
Title:  In short, he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better than
Title:  try pot-luck at the Try Pots.  But the directions he had given us
Title:  about keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened
Title:  a white church to the larboard, and then keeping that on the larboard
Title:  hand till we made a corner three points to the starboard, and that
Title:  done, then ask the first man we met where the place was: these
Title:  crooked directions of his very much puzzled us at first, especially
Title:  as, at the outset, Queequeg insisted that the yellow warehouse--our
Title:  first point of departure--must be left on the larboard hand, whereas
Title:  I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard.
Title:  However, by dint of beating about a little in the dark, and now and
Title:  then knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way, we at
Title:  last came to something which there was no mistaking.
Title:  
Title:  Two enormous wooden pots painted black, and suspended by asses' ears,
Title:  swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast, planted in front of an
Title:  old doorway.  The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the
Title:  other side, so that this old top-mast looked not a little like a
Title:  gallows.  Perhaps I was over sensitive to such impressions at the
Title:  time, but I could not help staring at this gallows with a vague
Title:  misgiving.  A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two
Title:  remaining horns; yes, TWO of them, one for Queequeg, and one for me.
Title:  It's ominous, thinks I.  A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my
Title:  first whaling port; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen's
Title:  chapel; and here a gallows! and a pair of prodigious black pots too!
Title:  Are these last throwing out oblique hints touching Tophet?
Title:  
Title:  I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman
Title:  with yellow hair and a yellow gown, standing in the porch of the inn,
Title:  under a dull red lamp swinging there, that looked much like an
Title:  injured eye, and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple
Title:  woollen shirt.
Title:  
Title:  "Get along with ye," said she to the man, "or I'll be combing ye!"
Title:  
Title:  "Come on, Queequeg," said I, "all right.  There's Mrs. Hussey."
Title:  
Title:  And so it turned out; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home, but leaving
Title:  Mrs. Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs.  Upon
Title:  making known our desires for a supper and a bed, Mrs. Hussey,
Title:  postponing further scolding for the present, ushered us into a little
Title:  room, and seating us at a table spread with the relics of a recently
Title:  concluded repast, turned round to us and said--"Clam or Cod?"
Title:  
Title:  "What's that about Cods, ma'am?" said I, with much politeness.
Title:  
Title:  "Clam or Cod?" she repeated.
Title:  
Title:  "A clam for supper? a cold clam; is THAT what you mean, Mrs. Hussey?"
Title:  says I, "but that's a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter
Title:  time, ain't it, Mrs. Hussey?"
Title:  
Title:  But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple
Title:  Shirt, who was waiting for it in the entry, and seeming to hear
Title:  nothing but the word "clam," Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door
Title:  leading to the kitchen, and bawling out "clam for two," disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  "Queequeg," said I, "do you think that we can make out a supper for
Title:  us both on one clam?"
Title:  
Title:  However, a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the
Title:  apparently cheerless prospect before us.  But when that smoking
Title:  chowder came in, the mystery was delightfully explained.  Oh, sweet
Title:  friends! hearken to me.  It was made of small juicy clams, scarcely
Title:  bigger than hazel nuts, mixed with pounded ship biscuit, and salted
Title:  pork cut up into little flakes; the whole enriched with butter, and
Title:  plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt.  Our appetites being
Title:  sharpened by the frosty voyage, and in particular, Queequeg seeing
Title:  his favourite fishing food before him, and the chowder being
Title:  surpassingly excellent, we despatched it with great expedition: when
Title:  leaning back a moment and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey's clam and cod
Title:  announcement, I thought I would try a little experiment.  Stepping to
Title:  the kitchen door, I uttered the word "cod" with great emphasis, and
Title:  resumed my seat.  In a few moments the savoury steam came forth
Title:  again, but with a different flavor, and in good time a fine
Title:  cod-chowder was placed before us.
Title:  
Title:  We resumed business; and while plying our spoons in the bowl, thinks
Title:  I to myself, I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head?
Title:  What's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people?  "But
Title:  look, Queequeg, ain't that a live eel in your bowl?  Where's your
Title:  harpoon?"
Title:  
Title:  Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots, which well deserved
Title:  its name; for the pots there were always boiling chowders.  Chowder
Title:  for breakfast, and chowder for dinner, and chowder for supper, till
Title:  you began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes.  The
Title:  area before the house was paved with clam-shells.  Mrs. Hussey wore a
Title:  polished necklace of codfish vertebra; and Hosea Hussey had his
Title:  account books bound in superior old shark-skin.  There was a fishy
Title:  flavor to the milk, too, which I could not at all account for, till
Title:  one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some
Title:  fishermen's boats, I saw Hosea's brindled cow feeding on fish
Title:  remnants, and marching along the sand with each foot in a cod's
Title:  decapitated head, looking very slip-shod, I assure ye.
Title:  
Title:  Supper concluded, we received a lamp, and directions from Mrs. Hussey
Title:  concerning the nearest way to bed; but, as Queequeg was about to
Title:  precede me up the stairs, the lady reached forth her arm, and
Title:  demanded his harpoon; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers.  "Why
Title:  not? said I; "every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon--but why
Title:  not?"  "Because it's dangerous," says she.  "Ever since young Stiggs
Title:  coming from that unfort'nt v'y'ge of his, when he was gone four years
Title:  and a half, with only three barrels of ILE, was found dead in my
Title:  first floor back, with his harpoon in his side; ever since then I
Title:  allow no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at
Title:  night.  So, Mr. Queequeg" (for she had learned his name), "I will
Title:  just take this here iron, and keep it for you till morning.  But the
Title:  chowder; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast, men?"
Title:  
Title:  "Both," says I; "and let's have a couple of smoked herring by way of
Title:  variety."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 16
Title:  
Title:  The Ship.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow.  But to my surprise and
Title:  no small concern, Queequeg now gave me to understand, that he had
Title:  been diligently consulting Yojo--the name of his black little
Title:  god--and Yojo had told him two or three times over, and strongly
Title:  insisted upon it everyway, that instead of our going together among
Title:  the whaling-fleet in harbor, and in concert selecting our craft;
Title:  instead of this, I say, Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of
Title:  the ship should rest wholly with me, inasmuch as Yojo purposed
Title:  befriending us; and, in order to do so, had already pitched upon a
Title:  vessel, which, if left to myself, I, Ishmael, should infallibly light
Title:  upon, for all the world as though it had turned out by chance; and in
Title:  that vessel I must immediately ship myself, for the present
Title:  irrespective of Queequeg.
Title:  
Title:  I have forgotten to mention that, in many things, Queequeg placed
Title:  great confidence in the excellence of Yojo's judgment and surprising
Title:  forecast of things; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem, as a
Title:  rather good sort of god, who perhaps meant well enough upon the
Title:  whole, but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs.
Title:  
Title:  Now, this plan of Queequeg's, or rather Yojo's, touching the
Title:  selection of our craft; I did not like that plan at all.  I had not a
Title:  little relied upon Queequeg's sagacity to point out the whaler best
Title:  fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely.  But as all my
Title:  remonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg, I was obliged to
Title:  acquiesce; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with a
Title:  determined rushing sort of energy and vigor, that should quickly
Title:  settle that trifling little affair.  Next morning early, leaving
Title:  Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom--for it seemed that
Title:  it was some sort of Lent or Ramadan, or day of fasting, humiliation,
Title:  and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day; HOW it was I never could
Title:  find out, for, though I applied myself to it several times, I never
Title:  could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles--leaving Queequeg,
Title:  then, fasting on his tomahawk pipe, and Yojo warming himself at his
Title:  sacrificial fire of shavings, I sallied out among the shipping.
Title:  After much prolonged sauntering and many random inquiries, I learnt
Title:  that there were three ships up for three-years' voyages--The
Title:  Devil-dam, the Tit-bit, and the Pequod.  DEVIL-DAM, I do not know
Title:  the origin of; TIT-BIT is obvious; PEQUOD, you will no doubt
Title:  remember, was the name of a celebrated tribe of Massachusetts
Title:  Indians; now extinct as the ancient Medes.  I peered and pryed about
Title:  the Devil-dam; from her, hopped over to the Tit-bit; and finally,
Title:  going on board the Pequod, looked around her for a moment, and then
Title:  decided that this was the very ship for us.
Title:  
Title:  You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day, for aught I
Title:  know;--square-toed luggers; mountainous Japanese junks; butter-box
Title:  galliots, and what not; but take my word for it, you never saw such a
Title:  rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod.  She was a ship of the
Title:  old school, rather small if anything; with an old-fashioned
Title:  claw-footed look about her.  Long seasoned and weather-stained in the
Title:  typhoons and calms of all four oceans, her old hull's complexion was
Title:  darkened like a French grenadier's, who has alike fought in Egypt and
Title:  Siberia.  Her venerable bows looked bearded.  Her masts--cut
Title:  somewhere on the coast of Japan, where her original ones were lost
Title:  overboard in a gale--her masts stood stiffly up like the spines of
Title:  the three old kings of Cologne.  Her ancient decks were worn and
Title:  wrinkled, like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in Canterbury
Title:  Cathedral where Becket bled.  But to all these her old antiquities,
Title:  were added new and marvellous features, pertaining to the wild
Title:  business that for more than half a century she had followed.  Old
Title:  Captain Peleg, many years her chief-mate, before he commanded another
Title:  vessel of his own, and now a retired seaman, and one of the principal
Title:  owners of the Pequod,--this old Peleg, during the term of his
Title:  chief-mateship, had built upon her original grotesqueness, and inlaid
Title:  it, all over, with a quaintness both of material and device,
Title:  unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake's carved buckler or
Title:  bedstead.  She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor,
Title:  his neck heavy with pendants of polished ivory.  She was a thing of
Title:  trophies.  A cannibal of a craft, tricking herself forth in the
Title:  chased bones of her enemies.  All round, her unpanelled, open
Title:  bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw, with the long sharp
Title:  teeth of the sperm whale, inserted there for pins, to fasten her old
Title:  hempen thews and tendons to.  Those thews ran not through base blocks
Title:  of land wood, but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory.
Title:  Scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm, she sported there a
Title:  tiller; and that tiller was in one mass, curiously carved from the
Title:  long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe.  The helmsman who
Title:  steered by that tiller in a tempest, felt like the Tartar, when he
Title:  holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw.  A noble craft, but
Title:  somehow a most melancholy!  All noble things are touched with that.
Title:  
Title:  Now when I looked about the quarter-deck, for some one having
Title:  authority, in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage,
Title:  at first I saw nobody; but I could not well overlook a strange sort
Title:  of tent, or rather wigwam, pitched a little behind the main-mast.  It
Title:  seemed only a temporary erection used in port.  It was of a conical
Title:  shape, some ten feet high; consisting of the long, huge slabs of
Title:  limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws
Title:  of the right-whale.  Planted with their broad ends on the deck, a
Title:  circle of these slabs laced together, mutually sloped towards each
Title:  other, and at the apex united in a tufted point, where the loose
Title:  hairy fibres waved to and fro like the top-knot on some old
Title:  Pottowottamie Sachem's head.  A triangular opening faced towards the
Title:  bows of the ship, so that the insider commanded a complete view
Title:  forward.
Title:  
Title:  And half concealed in this queer tenement, I at length found one who
Title:  by his aspect seemed to have authority; and who, it being noon, and
Title:  the ship's work suspended, was now enjoying respite from the burden
Title:  of command.  He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair, wriggling
Title:  all over with curious carving; and the bottom of which was formed of
Title:  a stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam was
Title:  constructed.
Title:  
Title:  There was nothing so very particular, perhaps, about the appearance
Title:  of the elderly man I saw; he was brown and brawny, like most old
Title:  seamen, and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth, cut in the Quaker
Title:  style; only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the
Title:  minutest wrinkles interlacing round his eyes, which must have arisen
Title:  from his continual sailings in many hard gales, and always looking to
Title:  windward;--for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become
Title:  pursed together.  Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl.
Title:  
Title:  "Is this the Captain of the Pequod?" said I, advancing to the door of
Title:  the tent.
Title:  
Title:  "Supposing it be the captain of the Pequod, what dost thou want of
Title:  him?" he demanded.
Title:  
Title:  "I was thinking of shipping."
Title:  
Title:  "Thou wast, wast thou?  I see thou art no Nantucketer--ever been in
Title:  a stove boat?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, Sir, I never have."
Title:  
Title:  "Dost know nothing at all about whaling, I dare say--eh?
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing, Sir; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn.  I've been
Title:  several voyages in the merchant service, and I think that--"
Title:  
Title:  "Merchant service be damned.  Talk not that lingo to me.  Dost see
Title:  that leg?--I'll take that leg away from thy stern, if ever thou
Title:  talkest of the marchant service to me again.  Marchant service
Title:  indeed!  I suppose now ye feel considerable proud of having served in
Title:  those marchant ships.  But flukes! man, what makes thee want to go a
Title:  whaling, eh?--it looks a little suspicious, don't it, eh?--Hast not
Title:  been a pirate, hast thou?--Didst not rob thy last Captain, didst
Title:  thou?--Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to
Title:  sea?"
Title:  
Title:  I protested my innocence of these things.  I saw that under the mask
Title:  of these half humorous innuendoes, this old seaman, as an insulated
Title:  Quakerish Nantucketer, was full of his insular prejudices, and rather
Title:  distrustful of all aliens, unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the
Title:  Vineyard.
Title:  
Title:  "But what takes thee a-whaling?  I want to know that before I think
Title:  of shipping ye."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, sir, I want to see what whaling is.  I want to see the world."
Title:  
Title:  "Want to see what whaling is, eh?  Have ye clapped eye on Captain
Title:  Ahab?"
Title:  
Title:  "Who is Captain Ahab, sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, I thought so.  Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship."
Title:  
Title:  "I am mistaken then.  I thought I was speaking to the Captain
Title:  himself."
Title:  
Title:  "Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg--that's who ye are speaking to,
Title:  young man.  It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod
Title:  fitted out for the voyage, and supplied with all her needs, including
Title:  crew.  We are part owners and agents.  But as I was going to say, if
Title:  thou wantest to know what whaling is, as thou tellest ye do, I can
Title:  put ye in a way of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it, past
Title:  backing out.  Clap eye on Captain Ahab, young man, and thou wilt find
Title:  that he has only one leg."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean, sir?  Was the other one lost by a whale?"
Title:  
Title:  "Lost by a whale!  Young man, come nearer to me: it was devoured,
Title:  chewed up, crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped
Title:  a boat!--ah, ah!"
Title:  
Title:  I was a little alarmed by his energy, perhaps also a little touched
Title:  at the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation, but said as calmly
Title:  as I could, "What you say is no doubt true enough, sir; but how could
Title:  I know there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale,
Title:  though indeed I might have inferred as much from the simple fact of
Title:  the accident."
Title:  
Title:  "Look ye now, young man, thy lungs are a sort of soft, d'ye see; thou
Title:  dost not talk shark a bit.  SURE, ye've been to sea before now; sure
Title:  of that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sir," said I, "I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in
Title:  the merchant--"
Title:  
Title:  "Hard down out of that!  Mind what I said about the marchant
Title:  service--don't aggravate me--I won't have it.  But let us understand
Title:  each other.  I have given thee a hint about what whaling is; do ye
Title:  yet feel inclined for it?"
Title:  
Title:  "I do, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Very good.  Now, art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live
Title:  whale's throat, and then jump after it?  Answer, quick!"
Title:  
Title:  "I am, sir, if it should be positively indispensable to do so; not to
Title:  be got rid of, that is; which I don't take to be the fact."
Title:  
Title:  "Good again.  Now then, thou not only wantest to go a-whaling, to
Title:  find out by experience what whaling is, but ye also want to go in
Title:  order to see the world?  Was not that what ye said?  I thought so.
Title:  Well then, just step forward there, and take a peep over the
Title:  weather-bow, and then back to me and tell me what ye see there."
Title:  
Title:  For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request, not
Title:  knowing exactly how to take it, whether humorously or in earnest.
Title:  But concentrating all his crow's feet into one scowl, Captain Peleg
Title:  started me on the errand.
Title:  
Title:  Going forward and glancing over the weather bow, I perceived that the
Title:  ship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide, was now obliquely
Title:  pointing towards the open ocean.  The prospect was unlimited, but
Title:  exceedingly monotonous and forbidding; not the slightest variety that
Title:  I could see.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what's the report?" said Peleg when I came back; "what did ye
Title:  see?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not much," I replied--"nothing but water; considerable horizon
Title:  though, and there's a squall coming up, I think."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, what does thou think then of seeing the world?  Do ye wish to
Title:  go round Cape Horn to see any more of it, eh?  Can't ye see the world
Title:  where you stand?"
Title:  
Title:  I was a little staggered, but go a-whaling I must, and I would; and
Title:  the Pequod was as good a ship as any--I thought the best--and all
Title:  this I now repeated to Peleg.  Seeing me so determined, he expressed
Title:  his willingness to ship me.
Title:  
Title:  "And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off," he added--"come
Title:  along with ye."  And so saying, he led the way below deck into the
Title:  cabin.
Title:  
Title:  Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and
Title:  surprising figure.  It turned out to be Captain Bildad, who along
Title:  with Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel; the
Title:  other shares, as is sometimes the case in these ports, being held by
Title:  a crowd of old annuitants; widows, fatherless children, and chancery
Title:  wards; each owning about the value of a timber head, or a foot of
Title:  plank, or a nail or two in the ship.  People in Nantucket invest
Title:  their money in whaling vessels, the same way that you do yours in
Title:  approved state stocks bringing in good interest.
Title:  
Title:  Now, Bildad, like Peleg, and indeed many other Nantucketers, was a
Title:  Quaker, the island having been originally settled by that sect; and
Title:  to this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure
Title:  the peculiarities of the Quaker, only variously and anomalously
Title:  modified by things altogether alien and heterogeneous.  For some of
Title:  these same Quakers are the most sanguinary of all sailors and
Title:  whale-hunters.  They are fighting Quakers; they are Quakers with a
Title:  vengeance.
Title:  
Title:  So that there are instances among them of men, who, named with
Title:  Scripture names--a singularly common fashion on the island--and in
Title:  childhood naturally imbibing the stately dramatic thee and thou of
Title:  the Quaker idiom; still, from the audacious, daring, and boundless
Title:  adventure of their subsequent lives, strangely blend with these
Title:  unoutgrown peculiarities, a thousand bold dashes of character, not
Title:  unworthy a Scandinavian sea-king, or a poetical Pagan Roman.  And
Title:  when these things unite in a man of greatly superior natural force,
Title:  with a globular brain and a ponderous heart; who has also by the
Title:  stillness and seclusion of many long night-watches in the remotest
Title:  waters, and beneath constellations never seen here at the north, been
Title:  led to think untraditionally and independently; receiving all
Title:  nature's sweet or savage impressions fresh from her own virgin
Title:  voluntary and confiding breast, and thereby chiefly, but with some
Title:  help from accidental advantages, to learn a bold and nervous lofty
Title:  language--that man makes one in a whole nation's census--a mighty
Title:  pageant creature, formed for noble tragedies.  Nor will it at all
Title:  detract from him, dramatically regarded, if either by birth or other
Title:  circumstances, he have what seems a half wilful overruling morbidness
Title:  at the bottom of his nature.  For all men tragically great are made
Title:  so through a certain morbidness.  Be sure of this, O young ambition,
Title:  all mortal greatness is but disease.  But, as yet we have not to do
Title:  with such an one, but with quite another; and still a man, who, if
Title:  indeed peculiar, it only results again from another phase of the
Title:  Quaker, modified by individual circumstances.
Title:  
Title:  Like Captain Peleg, Captain Bildad was a well-to-do, retired
Title:  whaleman.  But unlike Captain Peleg--who cared not a rush for what
Title:  are called serious things, and indeed deemed those self-same serious
Title:  things the veriest of all trifles--Captain Bildad had not only been
Title:  originally educated according to the strictest sect of Nantucket
Title:  Quakerism, but all his subsequent ocean life, and the sight of many
Title:  unclad, lovely island creatures, round the Horn--all that had not
Title:  moved this native born Quaker one single jot, had not so much as
Title:  altered one angle of his vest.  Still, for all this immutableness,
Title:  was there some lack of common consistency about worthy Captain
Title:  Peleg.  Though refusing, from conscientious scruples, to bear arms
Title:  against land invaders, yet himself had illimitably invaded the
Title:  Atlantic and Pacific; and though a sworn foe to human bloodshed, yet
Title:  had he in his straight-bodied coat, spilled tuns upon tuns of
Title:  leviathan gore.  How now in the contemplative evening of his days,
Title:  the pious Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence, I do
Title:  not know; but it did not seem to concern him much, and very probably
Title:  he had long since come to the sage and sensible conclusion that a
Title:  man's religion is one thing, and this practical world quite another.
Title:  This world pays dividends.  Rising from a little cabin-boy in short
Title:  clothes of the drabbest drab, to a harpooneer in a broad shad-bellied
Title:  waistcoat; from that becoming boat-header, chief-mate, and captain,
Title:  and finally a ship owner; Bildad, as I hinted before, had concluded
Title:  his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the
Title:  goodly age of sixty, and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet
Title:  receiving of his well-earned income.
Title:  
Title:  Now, Bildad, I am sorry to say, had the reputation of being an
Title:  incorrigible old hunks, and in his sea-going days, a bitter, hard
Title:  task-master.  They told me in Nantucket, though it certainly seems a
Title:  curious story, that when he sailed the old Categut whaleman, his
Title:  crew, upon arriving home, were mostly all carried ashore to the
Title:  hospital, sore exhausted and worn out.  For a pious man, especially
Title:  for a Quaker, he was certainly rather hard-hearted, to say the
Title:  least.  He never used to swear, though, at his men, they said; but
Title:  somehow he got an inordinate quantity of cruel, unmitigated hard work
Title:  out of them.  When Bildad was a chief-mate, to have his drab-coloured
Title:  eye intently looking at you, made you feel completely nervous, till
Title:  you could clutch something--a hammer or a marling-spike, and go to
Title:  work like mad, at something or other, never mind what.  Indolence and
Title:  idleness perished before him.  His own person was the exact
Title:  embodiment of his utilitarian character.  On his long, gaunt body, he
Title:  carried no spare flesh, no superfluous beard, his chin having a soft,
Title:  economical nap to it, like the worn nap of his broad-brimmed hat.
Title:  
Title:  Such, then, was the person that I saw seated on the transom when I
Title:  followed Captain Peleg down into the cabin.  The space between the
Title:  decks was small; and there, bolt-upright, sat old Bildad, who always
Title:  sat so, and never leaned, and this to save his coat tails.  His
Title:  broad-brim was placed beside him; his legs were stiffly crossed; his
Title:  drab vesture was buttoned up to his chin; and spectacles on nose, he
Title:  seemed absorbed in reading from a ponderous volume.
Title:  
Title:  "Bildad," cried Captain Peleg, "at it again, Bildad, eh?  Ye have
Title:  been studying those Scriptures, now, for the last thirty years, to my
Title:  certain knowledge.  How far ye got, Bildad?"
Title:  
Title:  As if long habituated to such profane talk from his old shipmate,
Title:  Bildad, without noticing his present irreverence, quietly looked up,
Title:  and seeing me, glanced again inquiringly towards Peleg.
Title:  
Title:  "He says he's our man, Bildad," said Peleg, "he wants to ship."
Title:  
Title:  "Dost thee?" said Bildad, in a hollow tone, and turning round to me.
Title:  
Title:  "I dost," said I unconsciously, he was so intense a Quaker.
Title:  
Title:  "What do ye think of him, Bildad?" said Peleg.
Title:  
Title:  "He'll do," said Bildad, eyeing me, and then went on spelling away at
Title:  his book in a mumbling tone quite audible.
Title:  
Title:  I thought him the queerest old Quaker I ever saw, especially as
Title:  Peleg, his friend and old shipmate, seemed such a blusterer.  But I
Title:  said nothing, only looking round me sharply.  Peleg now threw open a
Title:  chest, and drawing forth the ship's articles, placed pen and ink
Title:  before him, and seated himself at a little table.  I began to think
Title:  it was high time to settle with myself at what terms I would be
Title:  willing to engage for the voyage.  I was already aware that in the
Title:  whaling business they paid no wages; but all hands, including the
Title:  captain, received certain shares of the profits called lays, and that
Title:  these lays were proportioned to the degree of importance pertaining
Title:  to the respective duties of the ship's company.  I was also aware
Title:  that being a green hand at whaling, my own lay would not be very
Title:  large; but considering that I was used to the sea, could steer a
Title:  ship, splice a rope, and all that, I made no doubt that from all I
Title:  had heard I should be offered at least the 275th lay--that is, the
Title:  275th part of the clear net proceeds of the voyage, whatever that
Title:  might eventually amount to.  And though the 275th lay was what they
Title:  call a rather LONG LAY, yet it was better than nothing; and if we had
Title:  a lucky voyage, might pretty nearly pay for the clothing I would wear
Title:  out on it, not to speak of my three years' beef and board, for which
Title:  I would not have to pay one stiver.
Title:  
Title:  It might be thought that this was a poor way to accumulate a princely
Title:  fortune--and so it was, a very poor way indeed.  But I am one of
Title:  those that never take on about princely fortunes, and am quite
Title:  content if the world is ready to board and lodge me, while I am
Title:  putting up at this grim sign of the Thunder Cloud.  Upon the whole, I
Title:  thought that the 275th lay would be about the fair thing, but would not
Title:  have been surprised had I been offered the 200th, considering I was
Title:  of a broad-shouldered make.
Title:  
Title:  But one thing, nevertheless, that made me a little distrustful about
Title:  receiving a generous share of the profits was this: Ashore, I had
Title:  heard something of both Captain Peleg and his unaccountable old crony
Title:  Bildad; how that they being the principal proprietors of the Pequod,
Title:  therefore the other and more inconsiderable and scattered owners,
Title:  left nearly the whole management of the ship's affairs to these two.
Title:  And I did not know but what the stingy old Bildad might have a mighty
Title:  deal to say about shipping hands, especially as I now found him on
Title:  board the Pequod, quite at home there in the cabin, and reading his
Title:  Bible as if at his own fireside.  Now while Peleg was vainly trying
Title:  to mend a pen with his jack-knife, old Bildad, to my no small
Title:  surprise, considering that he was such an interested party in these
Title:  proceedings; Bildad never heeded us, but went on mumbling to himself
Title:  out of his book, "LAY not up for yourselves treasures upon earth,
Title:  where moth--"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, Captain Bildad," interrupted Peleg, "what d'ye say, what lay
Title:  shall we give this young man?"
Title:  
Title:  "Thou knowest best," was the sepulchral reply, "the seven hundred and
Title:  seventy-seventh wouldn't be too much, would it?--'where moth and rust
Title:  do corrupt, but LAY--'"
Title:  
Title:  LAY, indeed, thought I, and such a lay! the seven hundred and
Title:  seventy-seventh!  Well, old Bildad, you are determined that I, for
Title:  one, shall not LAY up many LAYS here below, where moth and rust do
Title:  corrupt.  It was an exceedingly LONG LAY that, indeed; and though
Title:  from the magnitude of the figure it might at first deceive a
Title:  landsman, yet the slightest consideration will show that though seven
Title:  hundred and seventy-seven is a pretty large number, yet, when you
Title:  come to make a TEENTH of it, you will then see, I say, that the seven
Title:  hundred and seventy-seventh part of a farthing is a good deal less
Title:  than seven hundred and seventy-seven gold doubloons; and so I thought
Title:  at the time.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, blast your eyes, Bildad," cried Peleg, "thou dost not want to
Title:  swindle this young man! he must have more than that."
Title:  
Title:  "Seven hundred and seventy-seventh," again said Bildad, without
Title:  lifting his eyes; and then went on mumbling--"for where your treasure
Title:  is, there will your heart be also."
Title:  
Title:  "I am going to put him down for the three hundredth," said Peleg, "do
Title:  ye hear that, Bildad!  The three hundredth lay, I say."
Title:  
Title:  Bildad laid down his book, and turning solemnly towards him said,
Title:  "Captain Peleg, thou hast a generous heart; but thou must consider
Title:  the duty thou owest to the other owners of this ship--widows and
Title:  orphans, many of them--and that if we too abundantly reward the
Title:  labors of this young man, we may be taking the bread from those
Title:  widows and those orphans.  The seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay,
Title:  Captain Peleg."
Title:  
Title:  "Thou Bildad!" roared Peleg, starting up and clattering about the
Title:  cabin.  "Blast ye, Captain Bildad, if I had followed thy advice in
Title:  these matters, I would afore now had a conscience to lug about that
Title:  would be heavy enough to founder the largest ship that ever sailed
Title:  round Cape Horn."
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Peleg," said Bildad steadily, "thy conscience may be drawing
Title:  ten inches of water, or ten fathoms, I can't tell; but as thou art
Title:  still an impenitent man, Captain Peleg, I greatly fear lest thy
Title:  conscience be but a leaky one; and will in the end sink thee
Title:  foundering down to the fiery pit, Captain Peleg."
Title:  
Title:  "Fiery pit! fiery pit! ye insult me, man; past all natural bearing,
Title:  ye insult me.  It's an all-fired outrage to tell any human creature
Title:  that he's bound to hell.  Flukes and flames!  Bildad, say that again
Title:  to me, and start my soul-bolts, but I'll--I'll--yes, I'll swallow a
Title:  live goat with all his hair and horns on.  Out of the cabin, ye
Title:  canting, drab-coloured son of a wooden gun--a straight wake with ye!"
Title:  
Title:  As he thundered out this he made a rush at Bildad, but with a
Title:  marvellous oblique, sliding celerity, Bildad for that time eluded
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  Alarmed at this terrible outburst between the two principal and
Title:  responsible owners of the ship, and feeling half a mind to give up
Title:  all idea of sailing in a vessel so questionably owned and temporarily
Title:  commanded, I stepped aside from the door to give egress to Bildad,
Title:  who, I made no doubt, was all eagerness to vanish from before the
Title:  awakened wrath of Peleg.  But to my astonishment, he sat down again
Title:  on the transom very quietly, and seemed to have not the slightest
Title:  intention of withdrawing.  He seemed quite used to impenitent Peleg
Title:  and his ways.  As for Peleg, after letting off his rage as he had,
Title:  there seemed no more left in him, and he, too, sat down like a lamb,
Title:  though he twitched a little as if still nervously agitated.  "Whew!"
Title:  he whistled at last--"the squall's gone off to leeward, I think.
Title:  Bildad, thou used to be good at sharpening a lance, mend that pen,
Title:  will ye.  My jack-knife here needs the grindstone.  That's he; thank
Title:  ye, Bildad.  Now then, my young man, Ishmael's thy name, didn't ye
Title:  say?  Well then, down ye go here, Ishmael, for the three hundredth
Title:  lay."
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Peleg," said I, "I have a friend with me who wants to ship
Title:  too--shall I bring him down to-morrow?"
Title:  
Title:  "To be sure," said Peleg.  "Fetch him along, and we'll look at him."
Title:  
Title:  "What lay does he want?" groaned Bildad, glancing up from the book
Title:  in which he had again been burying himself.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh! never thee mind about that, Bildad," said Peleg.  "Has he ever
Title:  whaled it any?" turning to me.
Title:  
Title:  "Killed more whales than I can count, Captain Peleg."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, bring him along then."
Title:  
Title:  And, after signing the papers, off I went; nothing doubting but that
Title:  I had done a good morning's work, and that the Pequod was the
Title:  identical ship that Yojo had provided to carry Queequeg and me round
Title:  the Cape.
Title:  
Title:  But I had not proceeded far, when I began to bethink me that the
Title:  Captain with whom I was to sail yet remained unseen by me; though,
Title:  indeed, in many cases, a whale-ship will be completely fitted out,
Title:  and receive all her crew on board, ere the captain makes himself
Title:  visible by arriving to take command; for sometimes these voyages are
Title:  so prolonged, and the shore intervals at home so exceedingly brief,
Title:  that if the captain have a family, or any absorbing concernment of
Title:  that sort, he does not trouble himself much about his ship in port,
Title:  but leaves her to the owners till all is ready for sea.  However, it
Title:  is always as well to have a look at him before irrevocably committing
Title:  yourself into his hands.  Turning back I accosted Captain Peleg,
Title:  inquiring where Captain Ahab was to be found.
Title:  
Title:  "And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab?  It's all right enough;
Title:  thou art shipped."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, but I should like to see him."
Title:  
Title:  "But I don't think thou wilt be able to at present.  I don't know
Title:  exactly what's the matter with him; but he keeps close inside the
Title:  house; a sort of sick, and yet he don't look so.  In fact, he ain't
Title:  sick; but no, he isn't well either.  Any how, young man, he won't
Title:  always see me, so I don't suppose he will thee.  He's a queer man,
Title:  Captain Ahab--so some think--but a good one.  Oh, thou'lt like him
Title:  well enough; no fear, no fear.  He's a grand, ungodly, god-like man,
Title:  Captain Ahab; doesn't speak much; but, when he does speak, then you
Title:  may well listen.  Mark ye, be forewarned; Ahab's above the common;
Title:  Ahab's been in colleges, as well as 'mong the cannibals; been used to
Title:  deeper wonders than the waves; fixed his fiery lance in mightier,
Title:  stranger foes than whales.  His lance! aye, the keenest and the surest
Title:  that out of all our isle!  Oh! he ain't Captain Bildad; no, and he
Title:  ain't Captain Peleg; HE'S AHAB, boy; and Ahab of old, thou knowest,
Title:  was a crowned king!"
Title:  
Title:  "And a very vile one.  When that wicked king was slain, the dogs, did
Title:  they not lick his blood?"
Title:  
Title:  "Come hither to me--hither, hither," said Peleg, with a significance
Title:  in his eye that almost startled me.  "Look ye, lad; never say that on
Title:  board the Pequod.  Never say it anywhere.  Captain Ahab did not name
Title:  himself.  'Twas a foolish, ignorant whim of his crazy, widowed
Title:  mother, who died when he was only a twelvemonth old.  And yet the old
Title:  squaw Tistig, at Gayhead, said that the name would somehow prove
Title:  prophetic.  And, perhaps, other fools like her may tell thee the
Title:  same.  I wish to warn thee.  It's a lie.  I know Captain Ahab well;
Title:  I've sailed with him as mate years ago; I know what he is--a good
Title:  man--not a pious, good man, like Bildad, but a swearing good
Title:  man--something like me--only there's a good deal more of him.  Aye,
Title:  aye, I know that he was never very jolly; and I know that on the
Title:  passage home, he was a little out of his mind for a spell; but it was
Title:  the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that
Title:  about, as any one might see.  I know, too, that ever since he lost
Title:  his leg last voyage by that accursed whale, he's been a kind of
Title:  moody--desperate moody, and savage sometimes; but that will all pass
Title:  off.  And once for all, let me tell thee and assure thee, young man,
Title:  it's better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing bad
Title:  one.  So good-bye to thee--and wrong not Captain Ahab, because he
Title:  happens to have a wicked name.  Besides, my boy, he has a wife--not
Title:  three voyages wedded--a sweet, resigned girl.  Think of that; by that
Title:  sweet girl that old man has a child: hold ye then there can be any
Title:  utter, hopeless harm in Ahab?  No, no, my lad; stricken, blasted, if
Title:  he be, Ahab has his humanities!"
Title:  
Title:  As I walked away, I was full of thoughtfulness; what had been
Title:  incidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab, filled me with a certain
Title:  wild vagueness of painfulness concerning him.  And somehow, at the
Title:  time, I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him, but for I don't know
Title:  what, unless it was the cruel loss of his leg.  And yet I also felt a
Title:  strange awe of him; but that sort of awe, which I cannot at all
Title:  describe, was not exactly awe; I do not know what it was.  But I felt
Title:  it; and it did not disincline me towards him; though I felt
Title:  impatience at what seemed like mystery in him, so imperfectly as he
Title:  was known to me then.  However, my thoughts were at length carried in
Title:  other directions, so that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 17
Title:  
Title:  The Ramadan.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  As Queequeg's Ramadan, or Fasting and Humiliation, was to continue
Title:  all day, I did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall; for
Title:  I cherish the greatest respect towards everybody's religious
Title:  obligations, never mind how comical, and could not find it in my
Title:  heart to undervalue even a congregation of ants worshipping a
Title:  toad-stool; or those other creatures in certain parts of our earth,
Title:  who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets,
Title:  bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on
Title:  account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his
Title:  name.
Title:  
Title:  I say, we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these
Title:  things, and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals,
Title:  pagans and what not, because of their half-crazy conceits on these
Title:  subjects.  There was Queequeg, now, certainly entertaining the most
Title:  absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan;--but what of that?
Title:  Queequeg thought he knew what he was about, I suppose; he seemed to
Title:  be content; and there let him rest.  All our arguing with him would
Title:  not avail; let him be, I say: and Heaven have mercy on us
Title:  all--Presbyterians and Pagans alike--for we are all somehow
Title:  dreadfully cracked about the head, and sadly need mending.
Title:  
Title:  Towards evening, when I felt assured that all his performances and
Title:  rituals must be over, I went up to his room and knocked at the door;
Title:  but no answer.  I tried to open it, but it was fastened inside.
Title:  "Queequeg," said I softly through the key-hole:--all silent.  "I say,
Title:  Queequeg! why don't you speak?  It's I--Ishmael."  But all remained
Title:  still as before.  I began to grow alarmed.  I had allowed him such
Title:  abundant time; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit.  I
Title:  looked through the key-hole; but the door opening into an odd corner
Title:  of the room, the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister
Title:  one.  I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line
Title:  of the wall, but nothing more.  I was surprised to behold resting
Title:  against the wall the wooden shaft of Queequeg's harpoon, which the
Title:  landlady the evening previous had taken from him, before our mounting
Title:  to the chamber.  That's strange, thought I; but at any rate, since
Title:  the harpoon stands yonder, and he seldom or never goes abroad without
Title:  it, therefore he must be inside here, and no possible mistake.
Title:  
Title:  "Queequeg!--Queequeg!"--all still.  Something must have happened.
Title:  Apoplexy!  I tried to burst open the door; but it stubbornly
Title:  resisted.  Running down stairs, I quickly stated my suspicions to the
Title:  first person I met--the chamber-maid.  "La! la!" she cried, "I
Title:  thought something must be the matter.  I went to make the bed after
Title:  breakfast, and the door was locked; and not a mouse to be heard; and
Title:  it's been just so silent ever since.  But I thought, may be, you had
Title:  both gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping.  La! la,
Title:  ma'am!--Mistress! murder!  Mrs. Hussey! apoplexy!"--and with these
Title:  cries, she ran towards the kitchen, I following.
Title:  
Title:  Mrs. Hussey soon appeared, with a mustard-pot in one hand and a
Title:  vinegar-cruet in the other, having just broken away from the
Title:  occupation of attending to the castors, and scolding her little black
Title:  boy meantime.
Title:  
Title:  "Wood-house!" cried I, "which way to it?  Run for God's sake, and
Title:  fetch something to pry open the door--the axe!--the axe! he's had a
Title:  stroke; depend upon it!"--and so saying I was unmethodically rushing
Title:  up stairs again empty-handed, when Mrs. Hussey interposed the
Title:  mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet, and the entire castor of her
Title:  countenance.
Title:  
Title:  "What's the matter with you, young man?"
Title:  
Title:  "Get the axe!  For God's sake, run for the doctor, some one, while I
Title:  pry it open!"
Title:  
Title:  "Look here," said the landlady, quickly putting down the
Title:  vinegar-cruet, so as to have one hand free; "look here; are you
Title:  talking about prying open any of my doors?"--and with that she seized
Title:  my arm.  "What's the matter with you?  What's the matter with you,
Title:  shipmate?"
Title:  
Title:  In as calm, but rapid a manner as possible, I gave her to understand
Title:  the whole case.  Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side
Title:  of her nose, she ruminated for an instant; then exclaimed--"No!  I
Title:  haven't seen it since I put it there."  Running to a little closet
Title:  under the landing of the stairs, she glanced in, and returning, told
Title:  me that Queequeg's harpoon was missing.  "He's killed himself," she
Title:  cried.  "It's unfort'nate Stiggs done over again there goes another
Title:  counterpane--God pity his poor mother!--it will be the ruin of my
Title:  house.  Has the poor lad a sister?  Where's that girl?--there, Betty,
Title:  go to Snarles the Painter, and tell him to paint me a sign, with--"no
Title:  suicides permitted here, and no smoking in the parlor;"--might as
Title:  well kill both birds at once.  Kill?  The Lord be merciful to his
Title:  ghost!  What's that noise there?  You, young man, avast there!"
Title:  
Title:  And running up after me, she caught me as I was again trying to force
Title:  open the door.
Title:  
Title:  "I don't allow it; I won't have my premises spoiled.  Go for the
Title:  locksmith, there's one about a mile from here.  But avast!" putting
Title:  her hand in her side-pocket, "here's a key that'll fit, I guess;
Title:  let's see."  And with that, she turned it in the lock; but, alas!
Title:  Queequeg's supplemental bolt remained unwithdrawn within.
Title:  
Title:  "Have to burst it open," said I, and was running down the entry a
Title:  little, for a good start, when the landlady caught at me, again
Title:  vowing I should not break down her premises; but I tore from her, and
Title:  with a sudden bodily rush dashed myself full against the mark.
Title:  
Title:  With a prodigious noise the door flew open, and the knob slamming
Title:  against the wall, sent the plaster to the ceiling; and there, good
Title:  heavens! there sat Queequeg, altogether cool and self-collected;
Title:  right in the middle of the room; squatting on his hams, and holding
Title:  Yojo on top of his head.  He looked neither one way nor the other
Title:  way, but sat like a carved image with scarce a sign of active life.
Title:  
Title:  "Queequeg," said I, going up to him, "Queequeg, what's the matter
Title:  with you?"
Title:  
Title:  "He hain't been a sittin' so all day, has he?" said the landlady.
Title:  
Title:  But all we said, not a word could we drag out of him; I almost felt
Title:  like pushing him over, so as to change his position, for it was
Title:  almost intolerable, it seemed so painfully and unnaturally
Title:  constrained; especially, as in all probability he had been sitting so
Title:  for upwards of eight or ten hours, going too without his regular
Title:  meals.
Title:  
Title:  "Mrs. Hussey," said I, "he's ALIVE at all events; so leave us, if you
Title:  please, and I will see to this strange affair myself."
Title:  
Title:  Closing the door upon the landlady, I endeavored to prevail upon
Title:  Queequeg to take a chair; but in vain.  There he sat; and all he
Title:  could do--for all my polite arts and blandishments--he would not move
Title:  a peg, nor say a single word, nor even look at me, nor notice my
Title:  presence in the slightest way.
Title:  
Title:  I wonder, thought I, if this can possibly be a part of his Ramadan;
Title:  do they fast on their hams that way in his native island.  It must be
Title:  so; yes, it's part of his creed, I suppose; well, then, let him
Title:  rest; he'll get up sooner or later, no doubt.  It can't last for
Title:  ever, thank God, and his Ramadan only comes once a year; and I don't
Title:  believe it's very punctual then.
Title:  
Title:  I went down to supper.  After sitting a long time listening to the
Title:  long stories of some sailors who had just come from a plum-pudding
Title:  voyage, as they called it (that is, a short whaling-voyage in a
Title:  schooner or brig, confined to the north of the line, in the Atlantic
Title:  Ocean only); after listening to these plum-puddingers till nearly
Title:  eleven o'clock, I went up stairs to go to bed, feeling quite sure by
Title:  this time Queequeg must certainly have brought his Ramadan to a
Title:  termination.  But no; there he was just where I had left him; he had
Title:  not stirred an inch.  I began to grow vexed with him; it seemed so
Title:  downright senseless and insane to be sitting there all day and half
Title:  the night on his hams in a cold room, holding a piece of wood on his
Title:  head.
Title:  
Title:  "For heaven's sake, Queequeg, get up and shake yourself; get up and
Title:  have some supper.  You'll starve; you'll kill yourself, Queequeg."
Title:  But not a word did he reply.
Title:  
Title:  Despairing of him, therefore, I determined to go to bed and to sleep;
Title:  and no doubt, before a great while, he would follow me.  But previous
Title:  to turning in, I took my heavy bearskin jacket, and threw it over
Title:  him, as it promised to be a very cold night; and he had nothing but
Title:  his ordinary round jacket on.  For some time, do all I would, I could
Title:  not get into the faintest doze.  I had blown out the candle; and the
Title:  mere thought of Queequeg--not four feet off--sitting there in that
Title:  uneasy position, stark alone in the cold and dark; this made me
Title:  really wretched.  Think of it; sleeping all night in the same room
Title:  with a wide awake pagan on his hams in this dreary, unaccountable
Title:  Ramadan!
Title:  
Title:  But somehow I dropped off at last, and knew nothing more till break
Title:  of day; when, looking over the bedside, there squatted Queequeg, as
Title:  if he had been screwed down to the floor.  But as soon as the first
Title:  glimpse of sun entered the window, up he got, with stiff and grating
Title:  joints, but with a cheerful look; limped towards me where I lay;
Title:  pressed his forehead again against mine; and said his Ramadan was
Title:  over.
Title:  
Title:  Now, as I before hinted, I have no objection to any person's
Title:  religion, be it what it may, so long as that person does not kill or
Title:  insult any other person, because that other person don't believe it
Title:  also.  But when a man's religion becomes really frantic; when it is a
Title:  positive torment to him; and, in fine, makes this earth of ours an
Title:  uncomfortable inn to lodge in; then I think it high time to take that
Title:  individual aside and argue the point with him.
Title:  
Title:  And just so I now did with Queequeg.  "Queequeg," said I, "get into
Title:  bed now, and lie and listen to me."  I then went on, beginning with
Title:  the rise and progress of the primitive religions, and coming down to
Title:  the various religions of the present time, during which time I
Title:  labored to show Queequeg that all these Lents, Ramadans, and
Title:  prolonged ham-squattings in cold, cheerless rooms were stark
Title:  nonsense; bad for the health; useless for the soul; opposed, in
Title:  short, to the obvious laws of Hygiene and common sense.  I told him,
Title:  too, that he being in other things such an extremely sensible and
Title:  sagacious savage, it pained me, very badly pained me, to see him now
Title:  so deplorably foolish about this ridiculous Ramadan of his.  Besides,
Title:  argued I, fasting makes the body cave in; hence the spirit caves in;
Title:  and all thoughts born of a fast must necessarily be half-starved.
Title:  This is the reason why most dyspeptic religionists cherish such
Title:  melancholy notions about their hereafters.  In one word, Queequeg,
Title:  said I, rather digressively; hell is an idea first born on an
Title:  undigested apple-dumpling; and since then perpetuated through the
Title:  hereditary dyspepsias nurtured by Ramadans.
Title:  
Title:  I then asked Queequeg whether he himself was ever troubled with
Title:  dyspepsia; expressing the idea very plainly, so that he could take it
Title:  in.  He said no; only upon one memorable occasion.  It was after a
Title:  great feast given by his father the king, on the gaining of a great
Title:  battle wherein fifty of the enemy had been killed by about two
Title:  o'clock in the afternoon, and all cooked and eaten that very evening.
Title:  
Title:  "No more, Queequeg," said I, shuddering; "that will do;" for I knew
Title:  the inferences without his further hinting them.  I had seen a sailor
Title:  who had visited that very island, and he told me that it was the
Title:  custom, when a great battle had been gained there, to barbecue all
Title:  the slain in the yard or garden of the victor; and then, one by one,
Title:  they were placed in great wooden trenchers, and garnished round like
Title:  a pilau, with breadfruit and cocoanuts; and with some parsley in
Title:  their mouths, were sent round with the victor's compliments to all
Title:  his friends, just as though these presents were so many Christmas
Title:  turkeys.
Title:  
Title:  After all, I do not think that my remarks about religion made much
Title:  impression upon Queequeg.  Because, in the first place, he somehow
Title:  seemed dull of hearing on that important subject, unless considered
Title:  from his own point of view; and, in the second place, he did not more
Title:  than one third understand me, couch my ideas simply as I would; and,
Title:  finally, he no doubt thought he knew a good deal more about the true
Title:  religion than I did.  He looked at me with a sort of condescending
Title:  concern and compassion, as though he thought it a great pity that
Title:  such a sensible young man should be so hopelessly lost to evangelical
Title:  pagan piety.
Title:  
Title:  At last we rose and dressed; and Queequeg, taking a prodigiously
Title:  hearty breakfast of chowders of all sorts, so that the landlady
Title:  should not make much profit by reason of his Ramadan, we sallied out
Title:  to board the Pequod, sauntering along, and picking our teeth with
Title:  halibut bones.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 18
Title:  
Title:  His Mark.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  As we were walking down the end of the wharf towards the ship,
Title:  Queequeg carrying his harpoon, Captain Peleg in his gruff voice
Title:  loudly hailed us from his wigwam, saying he had not suspected my
Title:  friend was a cannibal, and furthermore announcing that he let no
Title:  cannibals on board that craft, unless they previously produced their
Title:  papers.
Title:  
Title:  "What do you mean by that, Captain Peleg?" said I, now jumping on the
Title:  bulwarks, and leaving my comrade standing on the wharf.
Title:  
Title:  "I mean," he replied, "he must show his papers."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said Captain Bildad in his hollow voice, sticking his head
Title:  from behind Peleg's, out of the wigwam.  "He must show that he's
Title:  converted.  Son of darkness," he added, turning to Queequeg, "art
Title:  thou at present in communion with any Christian church?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why," said I, "he's a member of the first Congregational Church."
Title:  Here be it said, that many tattooed savages sailing in Nantucket
Title:  ships at last come to be converted into the churches.
Title:  
Title:  "First Congregational Church," cried Bildad, "what! that worships in
Title:  Deacon Deuteronomy Coleman's meeting-house?" and so saying, taking
Title:  out his spectacles, he rubbed them with his great yellow bandana
Title:  handkerchief, and putting them on very carefully, came out of the
Title:  wigwam, and leaning stiffly over the bulwarks, took a good long look
Title:  at Queequeg.
Title:  
Title:  "How long hath he been a member?" he then said, turning to me; "not
Title:  very long, I rather guess, young man."
Title:  
Title:  "No," said Peleg, "and he hasn't been baptized right either, or it
Title:  would have washed some of that devil's blue off his face."
Title:  
Title:  "Do tell, now," cried Bildad, "is this Philistine a regular member of
Title:  Deacon Deuteronomy's meeting?  I never saw him going there, and I
Title:  pass it every Lord's day."
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know anything about Deacon Deuteronomy or his meeting," said
Title:  I; "all I know is, that Queequeg here is a born member of the First
Title:  Congregational Church.  He is a deacon himself, Queequeg is."
Title:  
Title:  "Young man," said Bildad sternly, "thou art skylarking with
Title:  me--explain thyself, thou young Hittite.  What church dost thee mean?
Title:  answer me."
Title:  
Title:  Finding myself thus hard pushed, I replied.  "I mean, sir, the same
Title:  ancient Catholic Church to which you and I, and Captain Peleg there,
Title:  and Queequeg here, and all of us, and every mother's son and soul of
Title:  us belong; the great and everlasting First Congregation of this whole
Title:  worshipping world; we all belong to that; only some of us cherish
Title:  some queer crotchets no ways touching the grand belief; in THAT we
Title:  all join hands."
Title:  
Title:  "Splice, thou mean'st SPLICE hands," cried Peleg, drawing nearer.
Title:  "Young man, you'd better ship for a missionary, instead of a
Title:  fore-mast hand; I never heard a better sermon.  Deacon
Title:  Deuteronomy--why Father Mapple himself couldn't beat it, and he's
Title:  reckoned something.  Come aboard, come aboard; never mind about the
Title:  papers.  I say, tell Quohog there--what's that you call him? tell
Title:  Quohog to step along.  By the great anchor, what a harpoon he's got
Title:  there! looks like good stuff that; and he handles it about right.  I
Title:  say, Quohog, or whatever your name is, did you ever stand in the head
Title:  of a whale-boat? did you ever strike a fish?"
Title:  
Title:  Without saying a word, Queequeg, in his wild sort of way, jumped upon
Title:  the bulwarks, from thence into the bows of one of the whale-boats
Title:  hanging to the side; and then bracing his left knee, and poising his
Title:  harpoon, cried out in some such way as this:--
Title:  
Title:  "Cap'ain, you see him small drop tar on water dere?  You see him?
Title:  well, spose him one whale eye, well, den!" and taking sharp aim at
Title:  it, he darted the iron right over old Bildad's broad brim, clean
Title:  across the ship's decks, and struck the glistening tar spot out of
Title:  sight.
Title:  
Title:  "Now," said Queequeg, quietly hauling in the line, "spos-ee him
Title:  whale-e eye; why, dad whale dead."
Title:  
Title:  "Quick, Bildad," said Peleg, his partner, who, aghast at the close
Title:  vicinity of the flying harpoon, had retreated towards the cabin
Title:  gangway.  "Quick, I say, you Bildad, and get the ship's papers.  We
Title:  must have Hedgehog there, I mean Quohog, in one of our boats.  Look
Title:  ye, Quohog, we'll give ye the ninetieth lay, and that's more than
Title:  ever was given a harpooneer yet out of Nantucket."
Title:  
Title:  So down we went into the cabin, and to my great joy Queequeg was soon
Title:  enrolled among the same ship's company to which I myself belonged.
Title:  
Title:  When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready
Title:  for signing, he turned to me and said, "I guess, Quohog there don't
Title:  know how to write, does he?  I say, Quohog, blast ye! dost thou sign
Title:  thy name or make thy mark?
Title:  
Title:  But at this question, Queequeg, who had twice or thrice before taken
Title:  part in similar ceremonies, looked no ways abashed; but taking the
Title:  offered pen, copied upon the paper, in the proper place, an exact
Title:  counterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm;
Title:  so that through Captain Peleg's obstinate mistake touching his
Title:  appellative, it stood something like this:--
Title:  
Title:  Quohog.
Title:  his X mark.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing
Title:  Queequeg, and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge
Title:  pockets of his broad-skirted drab coat, took out a bundle of tracts,
Title:  and selecting one entitled "The Latter Day Coming; or No Time to
Title:  Lose," placed it in Queequeg's hands, and then grasping them and the
Title:  book with both his, looked earnestly into his eyes, and said, "Son of
Title:  darkness, I must do my duty by thee; I am part owner of this ship,
Title:  and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew; if thou still
Title:  clingest to thy Pagan ways, which I sadly fear, I beseech thee,
Title:  remain not for aye a Belial bondsman.  Spurn the idol Bell, and the
Title:  hideous dragon; turn from the wrath to come; mind thine eye, I say;
Title:  oh! goodness gracious! steer clear of the fiery pit!"
Title:  
Title:  Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad's language,
Title:  heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases.
Title:  
Title:  "Avast there, avast there, Bildad, avast now spoiling our
Title:  harpooneer," Peleg.  "Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers--it
Title:  takes the shark out of 'em; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint
Title:  pretty sharkish.  There was young Nat Swaine, once the bravest
Title:  boat-header out of all Nantucket and the Vineyard; he joined the
Title:  meeting, and never came to good.  He got so frightened about his
Title:  plaguy soul, that he shrinked and sheered away from whales, for fear
Title:  of after-claps, in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones."
Title:  
Title:  "Peleg!  Peleg!" said Bildad, lifting his eyes and hands, "thou
Title:  thyself, as I myself, hast seen many a perilous time; thou knowest,
Title:  Peleg, what it is to have the fear of death; how, then, can'st thou
Title:  prate in this ungodly guise.  Thou beliest thine own heart, Peleg.
Title:  Tell me, when this same Pequod here had her three masts overboard in
Title:  that typhoon on Japan, that same voyage when thou went mate with
Title:  Captain Ahab, did'st thou not think of Death and the Judgment then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Hear him, hear him now," cried Peleg, marching across the cabin, and
Title:  thrusting his hands far down into his pockets,--"hear him, all of ye.
Title:  Think of that!  When every moment we thought the ship would sink!
Title:  Death and the Judgment then?  What?  With all three masts making such
Title:  an everlasting thundering against the side; and every sea breaking
Title:  over us, fore and aft.  Think of Death and the Judgment then?  No!
Title:  no time to think about Death then.  Life was what Captain Ahab and I
Title:  was thinking of; and how to save all hands--how to rig
Title:  jury-masts--how to get into the nearest port; that was what I was
Title:  thinking of."
Title:  
Title:  Bildad said no more, but buttoning up his coat, stalked on deck,
Title:  where we followed him.  There he stood, very quietly overlooking some
Title:  sailmakers who were mending a top-sail in the waist.  Now and then he
Title:  stooped to pick up a patch, or save an end of tarred twine, which
Title:  otherwise might have been wasted.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 19
Title:  
Title:  The Prophet.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Shipmates, have ye shipped in that ship?"
Title:  
Title:  Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod, and were sauntering away from
Title:  the water, for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts, when
Title:  the above words were put to us by a stranger, who, pausing before us,
Title:  levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question.  He was
Title:  but shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers; a rag
Title:  of a black handkerchief investing his neck.  A confluent small-pox
Title:  had in all directions flowed over his face, and left it like the
Title:  complicated ribbed bed of a torrent, when the rushing waters have
Title:  been dried up.
Title:  
Title:  "Have ye shipped in her?" he repeated.
Title:  
Title:  "You mean the ship Pequod, I suppose," said I, trying to gain a
Title:  little more time for an uninterrupted look at him.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, the Pequod--that ship there," he said, drawing back his whole
Title:  arm, and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him, with the
Title:  fixed bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," said I, "we have just signed the articles."
Title:  
Title:  "Anything down there about your souls?"
Title:  
Title:  "About what?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, perhaps you hav'n't got any," he said quickly.  "No matter
Title:  though, I know many chaps that hav'n't got any,--good luck to 'em;
Title:  and they are all the better off for it.  A soul's a sort of a fifth
Title:  wheel to a wagon."
Title:  
Title:  "What are you jabbering about, shipmate?" said I.
Title:  
Title:  "HE'S got enough, though, to make up for all deficiencies of that
Title:  sort in other chaps," abruptly said the stranger, placing a nervous
Title:  emphasis upon the word HE.
Title:  
Title:  "Queequeg," said I, "let's go; this fellow has broken loose from
Title:  somewhere; he's talking about something and somebody we don't know."
Title:  
Title:  "Stop!" cried the stranger.  "Ye said true--ye hav'n't seen Old
Title:  Thunder yet, have ye?"
Title:  
Title:  "Who's Old Thunder?" said I, again riveted with the insane
Title:  earnestness of his manner.
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Ahab."
Title:  
Title:  "What! the captain of our ship, the Pequod?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, among some of us old sailor chaps, he goes by that name.  Ye
Title:  hav'n't seen him yet, have ye?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, we hav'n't.  He's sick they say, but is getting better, and will
Title:  be all right again before long."
Title:  
Title:  "All right again before long!" laughed the stranger, with a solemnly
Title:  derisive sort of laugh.  "Look ye; when Captain Ahab is all right,
Title:  then this left arm of mine will be all right; not before."
Title:  
Title:  "What do you know about him?"
Title:  
Title:  "What did they TELL you about him?  Say that!"
Title:  
Title:  "They didn't tell much of anything about him; only I've heard that
Title:  he's a good whale-hunter, and a good captain to his crew."
Title:  
Title:  "That's true, that's true--yes, both true enough.  But you must jump
Title:  when he gives an order.  Step and growl; growl and go--that's the
Title:  word with Captain Ahab.  But nothing about that thing that happened
Title:  to him off Cape Horn, long ago, when he lay like dead for three days
Title:  and nights; nothing about that deadly skrimmage with the Spaniard
Title:  afore the altar in Santa?--heard nothing about that, eh?  Nothing
Title:  about the silver calabash he spat into?  And nothing about his losing
Title:  his leg last voyage, according to the prophecy.  Didn't ye hear a
Title:  word about them matters and something more, eh?  No, I don't think ye
Title:  did; how could ye?  Who knows it?  Not all Nantucket, I guess.  But
Title:  hows'ever, mayhap, ye've heard tell about the leg, and how he lost
Title:  it; aye, ye have heard of that, I dare say.  Oh yes, THAT every one
Title:  knows a'most--I mean they know he's only one leg; and that a
Title:  parmacetti took the other off."
Title:  
Title:  "My friend," said I, "what all this gibberish of yours is about, I
Title:  don't know, and I don't much care; for it seems to me that you must
Title:  be a little damaged in the head.  But if you are speaking of Captain
Title:  Ahab, of that ship there, the Pequod, then let me tell you, that I
Title:  know all about the loss of his leg."
Title:  
Title:  "ALL about it, eh--sure you do?--all?"
Title:  
Title:  "Pretty sure."
Title:  
Title:  With finger pointed and eye levelled at the Pequod, the beggar-like
Title:  stranger stood a moment, as if in a troubled reverie; then starting a
Title:  little, turned and said:--"Ye've shipped, have ye?  Names down on the
Title:  papers?  Well, well, what's signed, is signed; and what's to be, will
Title:  be; and then again, perhaps it won't be, after all.  Anyhow, it's
Title:  all fixed and arranged a'ready; and some sailors or other must go
Title:  with him, I suppose; as well these as any other men, God pity 'em!
Title:  Morning to ye, shipmates, morning; the ineffable heavens bless ye;
Title:  I'm sorry I stopped ye."
Title:  
Title:  "Look here, friend," said I, "if you have anything important to tell
Title:  us, out with it; but if you are only trying to bamboozle us, you are
Title:  mistaken in your game; that's all I have to say."
Title:  
Title:  "And it's said very well, and I like to hear a chap talk up that way;
Title:  you are just the man for him--the likes of ye.  Morning to ye,
Title:  shipmates, morning!  Oh! when ye get there, tell 'em I've concluded
Title:  not to make one of 'em."
Title:  
Title:  "Ah, my dear fellow, you can't fool us that way--you can't fool us.
Title:  It is the easiest thing in the world for a man to look as if he had a
Title:  great secret in him."
Title:  
Title:  "Morning to ye, shipmates, morning."
Title:  
Title:  "Morning it is," said I.  "Come along, Queequeg, let's leave this
Title:  crazy man.  But stop, tell me your name, will you?"
Title:  
Title:  "Elijah."
Title:  
Title:  Elijah! thought I, and we walked away, both commenting, after each
Title:  other's fashion, upon this ragged old sailor; and agreed that he was
Title:  nothing but a humbug, trying to be a bugbear.  But we had not gone
Title:  perhaps above a hundred yards, when chancing to turn a corner, and
Title:  looking back as I did so, who should be seen but Elijah following us,
Title:  though at a distance.  Somehow, the sight of him struck me so, that I
Title:  said nothing to Queequeg of his being behind, but passed on with my
Title:  comrade, anxious to see whether the stranger would turn the same
Title:  corner that we did.  He did; and then it seemed to me that he was
Title:  dogging us, but with what intent I could not for the life of me
Title:  imagine.  This circumstance, coupled with his ambiguous,
Title:  half-hinting, half-revealing, shrouded sort of talk, now begat in me
Title:  all kinds of vague wonderments and half-apprehensions, and all
Title:  connected with the Pequod; and Captain Ahab; and the leg he had lost;
Title:  and the Cape Horn fit; and the silver calabash; and what Captain
Title:  Peleg had said of him, when I left the ship the day previous; and the
Title:  prediction of the squaw Tistig; and the voyage we had bound ourselves
Title:  to sail; and a hundred other shadowy things.
Title:  
Title:  I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was
Title:  really dogging us or not, and with that intent crossed the way with
Title:  Queequeg, and on that side of it retraced our steps.  But Elijah
Title:  passed on, without seeming to notice us.  This relieved me; and once
Title:  more, and finally as it seemed to me, I pronounced him in my heart, a
Title:  humbug.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 20
Title:  
Title:  All Astir.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  A day or two passed, and there was great activity aboard the Pequod.
Title:  Not only were the old sails being mended, but new sails were coming
Title:  on board, and bolts of canvas, and coils of rigging; in short,
Title:  everything betokened that the ship's preparations were hurrying to a
Title:  close.  Captain Peleg seldom or never went ashore, but sat in his
Title:  wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands: Bildad did all the
Title:  purchasing and providing at the stores; and the men employed in the
Title:  hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-fall.
Title:  
Title:  On the day following Queequeg's signing the articles, word was given
Title:  at all the inns where the ship's company were stopping, that their
Title:  chests must be on board before night, for there was no telling how
Title:  soon the vessel might be sailing.  So Queequeg and I got down our
Title:  traps, resolving, however, to sleep ashore till the last.  But it
Title:  seems they always give very long notice in these cases, and the ship
Title:  did not sail for several days.  But no wonder; there was a good deal
Title:  to be done, and there is no telling how many things to be thought of,
Title:  before the Pequod was fully equipped.
Title:  
Title:  Every one knows what a multitude of things--beds, sauce-pans, knives
Title:  and forks, shovels and tongs, napkins, nut-crackers, and what not,
Title:  are indispensable to the business of housekeeping.  Just so with
Title:  whaling, which necessitates a three-years' housekeeping upon the wide
Title:  ocean, far from all grocers, costermongers, doctors, bakers, and
Title:  bankers.  And though this also holds true of merchant vessels, yet
Title:  not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen.  For besides
Title:  the great length of the whaling voyage, the numerous articles
Title:  peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery, and the impossibility of
Title:  replacing them at the remote harbors usually frequented, it must be
Title:  remembered, that of all ships, whaling vessels are the most exposed
Title:  to accidents of all kinds, and especially to the destruction and loss
Title:  of the very things upon which the success of the voyage most depends.
Title:  Hence, the spare boats, spare spars, and spare lines and harpoons,
Title:  and spare everythings, almost, but a spare Captain and duplicate
Title:  ship.
Title:  
Title:  At the period of our arrival at the Island, the heaviest storage of
Title:  the Pequod had been almost completed; comprising her beef, bread,
Title:  water, fuel, and iron hoops and staves.  But, as before hinted, for
Title:  some time there was a continual fetching and carrying on board of
Title:  divers odds and ends of things, both large and small.
Title:  
Title:  Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain
Title:  Bildad's sister, a lean old lady of a most determined and
Title:  indefatigable spirit, but withal very kindhearted, who seemed
Title:  resolved that, if SHE could help it, nothing should be found wanting
Title:  in the Pequod, after once fairly getting to sea.  At one time she
Title:  would come on board with a jar of pickles for the steward's pantry;
Title:  another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate's desk, where
Title:  he kept his log; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small of
Title:  some one's rheumatic back.  Never did any woman better deserve her
Title:  name, which was Charity--Aunt Charity, as everybody called her.  And
Title:  like a sister of charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle
Title:  about hither and thither, ready to turn her hand and heart to
Title:  anything that promised to yield safety, comfort, and consolation to
Title:  all on board a ship in which her beloved brother Bildad was
Title:  concerned, and in which she herself owned a score or two of
Title:  well-saved dollars.
Title:  
Title:  But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming
Title:  on board, as she did the last day, with a long oil-ladle in one hand,
Title:  and a still longer whaling lance in the other.  Nor was Bildad himself
Title:  nor Captain Peleg at all backward.  As for Bildad, he carried about
Title:  with him a long list of the articles needed, and at every fresh
Title:  arrival, down went his mark opposite that article upon the paper.
Title:  Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den,
Title:  roaring at the men down the hatchways, roaring up to the riggers at
Title:  the mast-head, and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam.
Title:  
Title:  During these days of preparation, Queequeg and I often visited the
Title:  craft, and as often I asked about Captain Ahab, and how he was, and
Title:  when he was going to come on board his ship.  To these questions they
Title:  would answer, that he was getting better and better, and was expected
Title:  aboard every day; meantime, the two captains, Peleg and Bildad, could
Title:  attend to everything necessary to fit the vessel for the voyage.  If
Title:  I had been downright honest with myself, I would have seen very
Title:  plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed this
Title:  way to so long a voyage, without once laying my eyes on the man who
Title:  was to be the absolute dictator of it, so soon as the ship sailed out
Title:  upon the open sea.  But when a man suspects any wrong, it sometimes
Title:  happens that if he be already involved in the matter, he insensibly
Title:  strives to cover up his suspicions even from himself.  And much this
Title:  way it was with me.  I said nothing, and tried to think nothing.
Title:  
Title:  At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would
Title:  certainly sail.  So next morning, Queequeg and I took a very early
Title:  start.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 21
Title:  
Title:  Going Aboard.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was nearly six o'clock, but only grey imperfect misty dawn, when
Title:  we drew nigh the wharf.
Title:  
Title:  "There are some sailors running ahead there, if I see right," said I
Title:  to Queequeg, "it can't be shadows; she's off by sunrise, I guess;
Title:  come on!"
Title:  
Title:  "Avast!" cried a voice, whose owner at the same time coming close
Title:  behind us, laid a hand upon both our shoulders, and then insinuating
Title:  himself between us, stood stooping forward a little, in the uncertain
Title:  twilight, strangely peering from Queequeg to me.  It was Elijah.
Title:  
Title:  "Going aboard?"
Title:  
Title:  "Hands off, will you," said I.
Title:  
Title:  "Lookee here," said Queequeg, shaking himself, "go 'way!"
Title:  
Title:  "Ain't going aboard, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, we are," said I, "but what business is that of yours?  Do you
Title:  know, Mr. Elijah, that I consider you a little impertinent?"
Title:  
Title:  "No, no, no; I wasn't aware of that," said Elijah, slowly and
Title:  wonderingly looking from me to Queequeg, with the most unaccountable
Title:  glances.
Title:  
Title:  "Elijah," said I, "you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing.
Title:  We are going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans, and would prefer not
Title:  to be detained."
Title:  
Title:  "Ye be, be ye?  Coming back afore breakfast?"
Title:  
Title:  "He's cracked, Queequeg," said I, "come on."
Title:  
Title:  "Holloa!" cried stationary Elijah, hailing us when we had removed a
Title:  few paces.
Title:  
Title:  "Never mind him," said I, "Queequeg, come on."
Title:  
Title:  But he stole up to us again, and suddenly clapping his hand on my
Title:  shoulder, said--"Did ye see anything looking like men going towards
Title:  that ship a while ago?"
Title:  
Title:  Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question, I answered, saying,
Title:  "Yes, I thought I did see four or five men; but it was too dim to be
Title:  sure."
Title:  
Title:  "Very dim, very dim," said Elijah.  "Morning to ye."
Title:  
Title:  Once more we quitted him; but once more he came softly after us; and
Title:  touching my shoulder again, said, "See if you can find 'em now, will
Title:  ye?
Title:  
Title:  "Find who?"
Title:  
Title:  "Morning to ye! morning to ye!" he rejoined, again moving off.  "Oh!
Title:  I was going to warn ye against--but never mind, never mind--it's all
Title:  one, all in the family too;--sharp frost this morning, ain't it?
Title:  Good-bye to ye.  Shan't see ye again very soon, I guess; unless it's
Title:  before the Grand Jury."  And with these cracked words he finally
Title:  departed, leaving me, for the moment, in no small wonderment at his
Title:  frantic impudence.
Title:  
Title:  At last, stepping on board the Pequod, we found everything in
Title:  profound quiet, not a soul moving.  The cabin entrance was locked
Title:  within; the hatches were all on, and lumbered with coils of rigging.
Title:  Going forward to the forecastle, we found the slide of the scuttle
Title:  open.  Seeing a light, we went down, and found only an old rigger
Title:  there, wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket.  He was thrown at whole
Title:  length upon two chests, his face downwards and inclosed in his folded
Title:  arms.  The profoundest slumber slept upon him.
Title:  
Title:  "Those sailors we saw, Queequeg, where can they have gone to?" said
Title:  I, looking dubiously at the sleeper.  But it seemed that, when on the
Title:  wharf, Queequeg had not at all noticed what I now alluded to; hence I
Title:  would have thought myself to have been optically deceived in that
Title:  matter, were it not for Elijah's otherwise inexplicable question.
Title:  But I beat the thing down; and again marking the sleeper, jocularly
Title:  hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with the body;
Title:  telling him to establish himself accordingly.  He put his hand upon
Title:  the sleeper's rear, as though feeling if it was soft enough; and
Title:  then, without more ado, sat quietly down there.
Title:  
Title:  "Gracious!  Queequeg, don't sit there," said I.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh! perry dood seat," said Queequeg, "my country way; won't hurt
Title:  him face."
Title:  
Title:  "Face!" said I, "call that his face? very benevolent countenance
Title:  then; but how hard he breathes, he's heaving himself; get off,
Title:  Queequeg, you are heavy, it's grinding the face of the poor.  Get
Title:  off, Queequeg!  Look, he'll twitch you off soon.  I wonder he don't
Title:  wake."
Title:  
Title:  Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper, and
Title:  lighted his tomahawk pipe.  I sat at the feet.  We kept the pipe
Title:  passing over the sleeper, from one to the other.  Meanwhile, upon
Title:  questioning him in his broken fashion, Queequeg gave me to understand
Title:  that, in his land, owing to the absence of settees and sofas of all
Title:  sorts, the king, chiefs, and great people generally, were in the
Title:  custom of fattening some of the lower orders for ottomans; and to
Title:  furnish a house comfortably in that respect, you had only to buy up
Title:  eight or ten lazy fellows, and lay them round in the piers and
Title:  alcoves.  Besides, it was very convenient on an excursion; much
Title:  better than those garden-chairs which are convertible into
Title:  walking-sticks; upon occasion, a chief calling his attendant, and
Title:  desiring him to make a settee of himself under a spreading tree,
Title:  perhaps in some damp marshy place.
Title:  
Title:  While narrating these things, every time Queequeg received the
Title:  tomahawk from me, he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the
Title:  sleeper's head.
Title:  
Title:  "What's that for, Queequeg?"
Title:  
Title:  "Perry easy, kill-e; oh! perry easy!
Title:  
Title:  He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe,
Title:  which, it seemed, had in its two uses both brained his foes and
Title:  soothed his soul, when we were directly attracted to the sleeping
Title:  rigger.  The strong vapour now completely filling the contracted hole,
Title:  it began to tell upon him.  He breathed with a sort of muffledness;
Title:  then seemed troubled in the nose; then revolved over once or twice;
Title:  then sat up and rubbed his eyes.
Title:  
Title:  "Holloa!" he breathed at last, "who be ye smokers?"
Title:  
Title:  "Shipped men," answered I, "when does she sail?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, ye are going in her, be ye?  She sails to-day.  The
Title:  Captain came aboard last night."
Title:  
Title:  "What Captain?--Ahab?"
Title:  
Title:  "Who but him indeed?"
Title:  
Title:  I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab, when
Title:  we heard a noise on deck.
Title:  
Title:  "Holloa!  Starbuck's astir," said the rigger.  "He's a lively chief
Title:  mate, that; good man, and a pious; but all alive now, I must turn
Title:  to."  And so saying he went on deck, and we followed.
Title:  
Title:  It was now clear sunrise.  Soon the crew came on board in twos and
Title:  threes; the riggers bestirred themselves; the mates were actively
Title:  engaged; and several of the shore people were busy in bringing
Title:  various last things on board.  Meanwhile Captain Ahab remained
Title:  invisibly enshrined within his cabin.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 22
Title:  
Title:  Merry Christmas.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  At length, towards noon, upon the final dismissal of the ship's
Title:  riggers, and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf, and
Title:  after the ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat, with
Title:  her last gift--a night-cap for Stubb, the second mate, her
Title:  brother-in-law, and a spare Bible for the steward--after all this,
Title:  the two Captains, Peleg and Bildad, issued from the cabin, and
Title:  turning to the chief mate, Peleg said:
Title:  
Title:  "Now, Mr. Starbuck, are you sure everything is right?  Captain Ahab
Title:  is all ready--just spoke to him--nothing more to be got from shore,
Title:  eh?  Well, call all hands, then.  Muster 'em aft here--blast 'em!"
Title:  
Title:  "No need of profane words, however great the hurry, Peleg," said
Title:  Bildad, "but away with thee, friend Starbuck, and do our bidding."
Title:  
Title:  How now!  Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage,
Title:  Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on
Title:  the quarter-deck, just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea,
Title:  as well as to all appearances in port.  And, as for Captain Ahab, no
Title:  sign of him was yet to be seen; only, they said he was in the cabin.
Title:  But then, the idea was, that his presence was by no means necessary
Title:  in getting the ship under weigh, and steering her well out to sea.
Title:  Indeed, as that was not at all his proper business, but the pilot's;
Title:  and as he was not yet completely recovered--so they said--therefore,
Title:  Captain Ahab stayed below.  And all this seemed natural enough;
Title:  especially as in the merchant service many captains never show
Title:  themselves on deck for a considerable time after heaving up the
Title:  anchor, but remain over the cabin table, having a farewell
Title:  merry-making with their shore friends, before they quit the ship for
Title:  good with the pilot.
Title:  
Title:  But there was not much chance to think over the matter, for Captain
Title:  Peleg was now all alive.  He seemed to do most of the talking and
Title:  commanding, and not Bildad.
Title:  
Title:  "Aft here, ye sons of bachelors," he cried, as the sailors lingered
Title:  at the main-mast.  "Mr. Starbuck, drive'em aft."
Title:  
Title:  "Strike the tent there!"--was the next order.  As I hinted before,
Title:  this whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port; and on board
Title:  the Pequod, for thirty years, the order to strike the tent was well
Title:  known to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor.
Title:  
Title:  "Man the capstan!  Blood and thunder!--jump!"--was the next command,
Title:  and the crew sprang for the handspikes.
Title:  
Title:  Now in getting under weigh, the station generally occupied by the
Title:  pilot is the forward part of the ship.  And here Bildad, who, with
Title:  Peleg, be it known, in addition to his other officers, was one of the
Title:  licensed pilots of the port--he being suspected to have got himself
Title:  made a pilot in order to save the Nantucket pilot-fee to all the
Title:  ships he was concerned in, for he never piloted any other
Title:  craft--Bildad, I say, might now be seen actively engaged in looking
Title:  over the bows for the approaching anchor, and at intervals singing
Title:  what seemed a dismal stave of psalmody, to cheer the hands at the
Title:  windlass, who roared forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in
Title:  Booble Alley, with hearty good will.  Nevertheless, not three days
Title:  previous, Bildad had told them that no profane songs would be allowed
Title:  on board the Pequod, particularly in getting under weigh; and
Title:  Charity, his sister, had placed a small choice copy of Watts in each
Title:  seaman's berth.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, overseeing the other part of the ship, Captain Peleg ripped
Title:  and swore astern in the most frightful manner.  I almost thought he
Title:  would sink the ship before the anchor could be got up; involuntarily
Title:  I paused on my handspike, and told Queequeg to do the same, thinking
Title:  of the perils we both ran, in starting on the voyage with such a
Title:  devil for a pilot.  I was comforting myself, however, with the
Title:  thought that in pious Bildad might be found some salvation, spite of
Title:  his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay; when I felt a sudden sharp
Title:  poke in my rear, and turning round, was horrified at the apparition
Title:  of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my immediate
Title:  vicinity.  That was my first kick.
Title:  
Title:  "Is that the way they heave in the marchant service?" he roared.
Title:  "Spring, thou sheep-head; spring, and break thy backbone!  Why don't
Title:  ye spring, I say, all of ye--spring!  Quohog! spring, thou chap with
Title:  the red whiskers; spring there, Scotch-cap; spring, thou green
Title:  pants.  Spring, I say, all of ye, and spring your eyes out!"  And so
Title:  saying, he moved along the windlass, here and there using his leg
Title:  very freely, while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with his
Title:  psalmody.  Thinks I, Captain Peleg must have been drinking something
Title:  to-day.
Title:  
Title:  At last the anchor was up, the sails were set, and off we glided.  It
Title:  was a short, cold Christmas; and as the short northern day merged
Title:  into night, we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean,
Title:  whose freezing spray cased us in ice, as in polished armor.  The long
Title:  rows of teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight; and like
Title:  the white ivory tusks of some huge elephant, vast curving icicles
Title:  depended from the bows.
Title:  
Title:  Lank Bildad, as pilot, headed the first watch, and ever and anon, as
Title:  the old craft deep dived into the green seas, and sent the shivering
Title:  frost all over her, and the winds howled, and the cordage rang, his
Title:  steady notes were heard,--
Title:  
Title:  "Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood,
Title:  Stand dressed in living green.
Title:  So to the Jews old Canaan stood,
Title:  While Jordan rolled between."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then.  They
Title:  were full of hope and fruition.  Spite of this frigid winter night in
Title:  the boisterous Atlantic, spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket,
Title:  there was yet, it then seemed to me, many a pleasant haven in store;
Title:  and meads and glades so eternally vernal, that the grass shot up by
Title:  the spring, untrodden, unwilted, remains at midsummer.
Title:  
Title:  At last we gained such an offing, that the two pilots were needed no
Title:  longer.  The stout sail-boat that had accompanied us began ranging
Title:  alongside.
Title:  
Title:  It was curious and not unpleasing, how Peleg and Bildad were affected
Title:  at this juncture, especially Captain Bildad.  For loath to depart,
Title:  yet; very loath to leave, for good, a ship bound on so long and
Title:  perilous a voyage--beyond both stormy Capes; a ship in which some
Title:  thousands of his hard earned dollars were invested; a ship, in which
Title:  an old shipmate sailed as captain; a man almost as old as he, once
Title:  more starting to encounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw; loath
Title:  to say good-bye to a thing so every way brimful of every interest to
Title:  him,--poor old Bildad lingered long; paced the deck with anxious
Title:  strides; ran down into the cabin to speak another farewell word
Title:  there; again came on deck, and looked to windward; looked towards the
Title:  wide and endless waters, only bounded by the far-off unseen Eastern
Title:  Continents; looked towards the land; looked aloft; looked right and
Title:  left; looked everywhere and nowhere; and at last, mechanically
Title:  coiling a rope upon its pin, convulsively grasped stout Peleg by the
Title:  hand, and holding up a lantern, for a moment stood gazing heroically
Title:  in his face, as much as to say, "Nevertheless, friend Peleg, I can
Title:  stand it; yes, I can."
Title:  
Title:  As for Peleg himself, he took it more like a philosopher; but for all
Title:  his philosophy, there was a tear twinkling in his eye, when the
Title:  lantern came too near.  And he, too, did not a little run from cabin
Title:  to deck--now a word below, and now a word with Starbuck, the chief
Title:  mate.
Title:  
Title:  But, at last, he turned to his comrade, with a final sort of look
Title:  about him,--"Captain Bildad--come, old shipmate, we must go.  Back
Title:  the main-yard there!  Boat ahoy!  Stand by to come close alongside,
Title:  now!  Careful, careful!--come, Bildad, boy--say your last.  Luck to
Title:  ye, Starbuck--luck to ye, Mr. Stubb--luck to ye, Mr. Flask--good-bye
Title:  and good luck to ye all--and this day three years I'll have a hot
Title:  supper smoking for ye in old Nantucket.  Hurrah and away!"
Title:  
Title:  "God bless ye, and have ye in His holy keeping, men," murmured old
Title:  Bildad, almost incoherently.  "I hope ye'll have fine weather now, so
Title:  that Captain Ahab may soon be moving among ye--a pleasant sun is all
Title:  he needs, and ye'll have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go.
Title:  Be careful in the hunt, ye mates.  Don't stave the boats needlessly,
Title:  ye harpooneers; good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent.
Title:  within the year.  Don't forget your prayers, either.  Mr. Starbuck,
Title:  mind that cooper don't waste the spare staves.  Oh! the sail-needles
Title:  are in the green locker!  Don't whale it too much a' Lord's days,
Title:  men; but don't miss a fair chance either, that's rejecting Heaven's
Title:  good gifts.  Have an eye to the molasses tierce, Mr. Stubb; it was a
Title:  little leaky, I thought.  If ye touch at the islands, Mr. Flask,
Title:  beware of fornication.  Good-bye, good-bye!  Don't keep that cheese
Title:  too long down in the hold, Mr. Starbuck; it'll spoil.  Be careful
Title:  with the butter--twenty cents the pound it was, and mind ye, if--"
Title:  
Title:  "Come, come, Captain Bildad; stop palavering,--away!" and with that,
Title:  Peleg hurried him over the side, and both dropt into the boat.
Title:  
Title:  Ship and boat diverged; the cold, damp night breeze blew between; a
Title:  screaming gull flew overhead; the two hulls wildly rolled; we gave
Title:  three heavy-hearted cheers, and blindly plunged like fate into the
Title:  lone Atlantic.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 23
Title:  
Title:  The Lee Shore.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Some chapters back, one Bulkington was spoken of, a tall, newlanded
Title:  mariner, encountered in New Bedford at the inn.
Title:  
Title:  When on that shivering winter's night, the Pequod thrust her
Title:  vindictive bows into the cold malicious waves, who should I see
Title:  standing at her helm but Bulkington!  I looked with sympathetic awe
Title:  and fearfulness upon the man, who in mid-winter just landed from a
Title:  four years' dangerous voyage, could so unrestingly push off again for
Title:  still another tempestuous term.  The land seemed scorching to his
Title:  feet.  Wonderfullest things are ever the unmentionable; deep memories
Title:  yield no epitaphs; this six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave of
Title:  Bulkington.  Let me only say that it fared with him as with the
Title:  storm-tossed ship, that miserably drives along the leeward land.  The
Title:  port would fain give succor; the port is pitiful; in the port is
Title:  safety, comfort, hearthstone, supper, warm blankets, friends, all
Title:  that's kind to our mortalities.  But in that gale, the port, the
Title:  land, is that ship's direst jeopardy; she must fly all hospitality;
Title:  one touch of land, though it but graze the keel, would make her
Title:  shudder through and through.  With all her might she crowds all sail
Title:  off shore; in so doing, fights 'gainst the very winds that fain would
Title:  blow her homeward; seeks all the lashed sea's landlessness again; for
Title:  refuge's sake forlornly rushing into peril; her only friend her
Title:  bitterest foe!
Title:  
Title:  Know ye now, Bulkington?  Glimpses do ye seem to see of that mortally
Title:  intolerable truth; that all deep, earnest thinking is but the
Title:  intrepid effort of the soul to keep the open independence of her sea;
Title:  while the wildest winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her on
Title:  the treacherous, slavish shore?
Title:  
Title:  But as in landlessness alone resides highest truth, shoreless,
Title:  indefinite as God--so, better is it to perish in that howling
Title:  infinite, than be ingloriously dashed upon the lee, even if that were
Title:  safety!  For worm-like, then, oh! who would craven crawl to land!
Title:  Terrors of the terrible! is all this agony so vain?  Take heart, take
Title:  heart, O Bulkington!  Bear thee grimly, demigod!  Up from the spray
Title:  of thy ocean-perishing--straight up, leaps thy apotheosis!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 24
Title:  
Title:  The Advocate.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked in this business of
Title:  whaling; and as this business of whaling has somehow come to be
Title:  regarded among landsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputable
Title:  pursuit; therefore, I am all anxiety to convince ye, ye landsmen, of
Title:  the injustice hereby done to us hunters of whales.
Title:  
Title:  In the first place, it may be deemed almost superfluous to establish
Title:  the fact, that among people at large, the business of whaling is not
Title:  accounted on a level with what are called the liberal professions.
Title:  If a stranger were introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitan
Title:  society, it would but slightly advance the general opinion of his
Title:  merits, were he presented to the company as a harpooneer, say; and if
Title:  in emulation of the naval officers he should append the initials
Title:  S.W.F. (Sperm Whale Fishery) to his visiting card, such a procedure
Title:  would be deemed pre-eminently presuming and ridiculous.
Title:  
Title:  Doubtless one leading reason why the world declines honouring us
Title:  whalemen, is this: they think that, at best, our vocation amounts to
Title:  a butchering sort of business; and that when actively engaged
Title:  therein, we are surrounded by all manner of defilements.  Butchers we
Title:  are, that is true.  But butchers, also, and butchers of the bloodiest
Title:  badge have been all Martial Commanders whom the world invariably
Title:  delights to honour.  And as for the matter of the alleged
Title:  uncleanliness of our business, ye shall soon be initiated into
Title:  certain facts hitherto pretty generally unknown, and which, upon the
Title:  whole, will triumphantly plant the sperm whale-ship at least among
Title:  the cleanliest things of this tidy earth.  But even granting the
Title:  charge in question to be true; what disordered slippery decks of a
Title:  whale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable carrion of those
Title:  battle-fields from which so many soldiers return to drink in all
Title:  ladies' plaudits?  And if the idea of peril so much enhances the
Title:  popular conceit of the soldier's profession; let me assure ye that
Title:  many a veteran who has freely marched up to a battery, would quickly
Title:  recoil at the apparition of the sperm whale's vast tail, fanning into
Title:  eddies the air over his head.  For what are the comprehensible
Title:  terrors of man compared with the interlinked terrors and wonders of
Title:  God!
Title:  
Title:  But, though the world scouts at us whale hunters, yet does it
Title:  unwittingly pay us the profoundest homage; yea, an all-abounding
Title:  adoration! for almost all the tapers, lamps, and candles that burn
Title:  round the globe, burn, as before so many shrines, to our glory!
Title:  
Title:  But look at this matter in other lights; weigh it in all sorts of
Title:  scales; see what we whalemen are, and have been.
Title:  
Title:  Why did the Dutch in De Witt's time have admirals of their whaling
Title:  fleets?  Why did Louis XVI. of France, at his own personal expense,
Title:  fit out whaling ships from Dunkirk, and politely invite to that town
Title:  some score or two of families from our own island of Nantucket?  Why
Title:  did Britain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her whalemen in
Title:  bounties upwards of L1,000,000?  And lastly, how comes it that we
Title:  whalemen of America now outnumber all the rest of the banded whalemen
Title:  in the world; sail a navy of upwards of seven hundred vessels; manned
Title:  by eighteen thousand men; yearly consuming 4,000,000 of dollars; the
Title:  ships worth, at the time of sailing, $20,000,000! and every year
Title:  importing into our harbors a well reaped harvest of $7,000,000.  How
Title:  comes all this, if there be not something puissant in whaling?
Title:  
Title:  But this is not the half; look again.
Title:  
Title:  I freely assert, that the cosmopolite philosopher cannot, for his
Title:  life, point out one single peaceful influence, which within the last
Title:  sixty years has operated more potentially upon the whole broad world,
Title:  taken in one aggregate, than the high and mighty business of whaling.
Title:  One way and another, it has begotten events so remarkable in
Title:  themselves, and so continuously momentous in their sequential issues,
Title:  that whaling may well be regarded as that Egyptian mother, who bore
Title:  offspring themselves pregnant from her womb.  It would be a hopeless,
Title:  endless task to catalogue all these things.  Let a handful suffice.
Title:  For many years past the whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferreting
Title:  out the remotest and least known parts of the earth.  She has
Title:  explored seas and archipelagoes which had no chart, where no Cook or
Title:  Vancouver had ever sailed.  If American and European men-of-war
Title:  now peacefully ride in once savage harbors, let them fire salutes to
Title:  the honour and glory of the whale-ship, which originally showed them
Title:  the way, and first interpreted between them and the savages.  They
Title:  may celebrate as they will the heroes of Exploring Expeditions, your
Title:  Cooks, your Krusensterns; but I say that scores of anonymous
Title:  Captains have sailed out of Nantucket, that were as great, and
Title:  greater than your Cook and your Krusenstern.  For in their
Title:  succourless empty-handedness, they, in the heathenish sharked waters,
Title:  and by the beaches of unrecorded, javelin islands, battled with
Title:  virgin wonders and terrors that Cook with all his marines and
Title:  muskets would not willingly have dared.  All that is made such a
Title:  flourish of in the old South Sea Voyages, those things were but the
Title:  life-time commonplaces of our heroic Nantucketers.  Often,
Title:  adventures which Vancouver dedicates three chapters to, these men
Title:  accounted unworthy of being set down in the ship's common log.  Ah,
Title:  the world!  Oh, the world!
Title:  
Title:  Until the whale fishery rounded Cape Horn, no commerce but colonial,
Title:  scarcely any intercourse but colonial, was carried on between Europe
Title:  and the long line of the opulent Spanish provinces on the Pacific
Title:  coast.  It was the whaleman who first broke through the jealous
Title:  policy of the Spanish crown, touching those colonies; and, if space
Title:  permitted, it might be distinctly shown how from those whalemen at
Title:  last eventuated the liberation of Peru, Chili, and Bolivia from the
Title:  yoke of Old Spain, and the establishment of the eternal democracy in
Title:  those parts.
Title:  
Title:  That great America on the other side of the sphere, Australia, was
Title:  given to the enlightened world by the whaleman.  After its first
Title:  blunder-born discovery by a Dutchman, all other ships long shunned
Title:  those shores as pestiferously barbarous; but the whale-ship touched
Title:  there.  The whale-ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony.
Title:  Moreover, in the infancy of the first Australian settlement, the
Title:  emigrants were several times saved from starvation by the benevolent
Title:  biscuit of the whale-ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters.
Title:  The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the same truth, and do
Title:  commercial homage to the whale-ship, that cleared the way for the
Title:  missionary and the merchant, and in many cases carried the primitive
Title:  missionaries to their first destinations.  If that double-bolted
Title:  land, Japan, is ever to become hospitable, it is the whale-ship alone
Title:  to whom the credit will be due; for already she is on the threshold.
Title:  
Title:  But if, in the face of all this, you still declare that whaling has
Title:  no aesthetically noble associations connected with it, then am I
Title:  ready to shiver fifty lances with you there, and unhorse you with a
Title:  split helmet every time.
Title:  
Title:  The whale has no famous author, and whaling no famous chronicler, you
Title:  will say.
Title:  
Title:  THE WHALE NO FAMOUS AUTHOR, AND WHALING NO FAMOUS CHRONICLER?  Who
Title:  wrote the first account of our Leviathan?  Who but mighty Job!  And
Title:  who composed the first narrative of a whaling-voyage?  Who, but no
Title:  less a prince than Alfred the Great, who, with his own royal pen,
Title:  took down the words from Other, the Norwegian whale-hunter of those
Title:  times!  And who pronounced our glowing eulogy in Parliament?  Who,
Title:  but Edmund Burke!
Title:  
Title:  True enough, but then whalemen themselves are poor devils; they have
Title:  no good blood in their veins.
Title:  
Title:  NO GOOD BLOOD IN THEIR VEINS?  They have something better than royal
Title:  blood there.  The grandmother of Benjamin Franklin was Mary Morrel;
Title:  afterwards, by marriage, Mary Folger, one of the old settlers of
Title:  Nantucket, and the ancestress to a long line of Folgers and
Title:  harpooneers--all kith and kin to noble Benjamin--this day darting the
Title:  barbed iron from one side of the world to the other.
Title:  
Title:  Good again; but then all confess that somehow whaling is not
Title:  respectable.
Title:  
Title:  WHALING NOT RESPECTABLE?  Whaling is imperial!  By old English
Title:  statutory law, the whale is declared "a royal fish."*
Title:  
Title:  Oh, that's only nominal!  The whale himself has never figured in any
Title:  grand imposing way.
Title:  
Title:  THE WHALE NEVER FIGURED IN ANY GRAND IMPOSING WAY?  In one of the
Title:  mighty triumphs given to a Roman general upon his entering the
Title:  world's capital, the bones of a whale, brought all the way from the
Title:  Syrian coast, were the most conspicuous object in the cymballed
Title:  procession.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *See subsequent chapters for something more on this head.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Grant it, since you cite it; but, say what you will, there is no real
Title:  dignity in whaling.
Title:  
Title:  NO DIGNITY IN WHALING?  The dignity of our calling the very heavens
Title:  attest.  Cetus is a constellation in the South!  No more!  Drive
Title:  down your hat in presence of the Czar, and take it off to Queequeg!
Title:  No more!  I know a man that, in his lifetime, has taken three hundred
Title:  and fifty whales.  I account that man more honourable than that great
Title:  captain of antiquity who boasted of taking as many walled towns.
Title:  
Title:  And, as for me, if, by any possibility, there be any as yet
Title:  undiscovered prime thing in me; if I shall ever deserve any real
Title:  repute in that small but high hushed world which I might not be
Title:  unreasonably ambitious of; if hereafter I shall do anything that, upon
Title:  the whole, a man might rather have done than to have left undone; if,
Title:  at my death, my executors, or more properly my creditors, find any
Title:  precious MSS. in my desk, then here I prospectively ascribe all the
Title:  honour and the glory to whaling; for a whale-ship was my Yale College
Title:  and my Harvard.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 25
Title:  
Title:  Postscript.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  In behalf of the dignity of whaling, I would fain advance naught but
Title:  substantiated facts.  But after embattling his facts, an advocate who
Title:  should wholly suppress a not unreasonable surmise, which might tell
Title:  eloquently upon his cause--such an advocate, would he not be
Title:  blameworthy?
Title:  
Title:  It is well known that at the coronation of kings and queens, even
Title:  modern ones, a certain curious process of seasoning them for their
Title:  functions is gone through.  There is a saltcellar of state, so
Title:  called, and there may be a castor of state.  How they use the salt,
Title:  precisely--who knows?  Certain I am, however, that a king's head is
Title:  solemnly oiled at his coronation, even as a head of salad.  Can it
Title:  be, though, that they anoint it with a view of making its interior
Title:  run well, as they anoint machinery?  Much might be ruminated here,
Title:  concerning the essential dignity of this regal process, because in
Title:  common life we esteem but meanly and contemptibly a fellow who
Title:  anoints his hair, and palpably smells of that anointing.  In truth, a
Title:  mature man who uses hair-oil, unless medicinally, that man has
Title:  probably got a quoggy spot in him somewhere.  As a general rule, he
Title:  can't amount to much in his totality.
Title:  
Title:  But the only thing to be considered here, is this--what kind of oil
Title:  is used at coronations?  Certainly it cannot be olive oil, nor
Title:  macassar oil, nor castor oil, nor bear's oil, nor train oil, nor
Title:  cod-liver oil.  What then can it possibly be, but sperm oil in
Title:  its unmanufactured, unpolluted state, the sweetest of all oils?
Title:  
Title:  Think of that, ye loyal Britons! we whalemen supply your kings and
Title:  queens with coronation stuff!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 26
Title:  
Title:  Knights and Squires.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The chief mate of the Pequod was Starbuck, a native of Nantucket, and
Title:  a Quaker by descent.  He was a long, earnest man, and though born on
Title:  an icy coast, seemed well adapted to endure hot latitudes, his flesh
Title:  being hard as twice-baked biscuit.  Transported to the Indies, his
Title:  live blood would not spoil like bottled ale.  He must have been born
Title:  in some time of general drought and famine, or upon one of those fast
Title:  days for which his state is famous.  Only some thirty arid summers
Title:  had he seen; those summers had dried up all his physical
Title:  superfluousness.  But this, his thinness, so to speak, seemed no more
Title:  the token of wasting anxieties and cares, than it seemed the
Title:  indication of any bodily blight.  It was merely the condensation of
Title:  the man.  He was by no means ill-looking; quite the contrary.  His
Title:  pure tight skin was an excellent fit; and closely wrapped up in it,
Title:  and embalmed with inner health and strength, like a revivified
Title:  Egyptian, this Starbuck seemed prepared to endure for long ages to
Title:  come, and to endure always, as now; for be it Polar snow or torrid
Title:  sun, like a patent chronometer, his interior vitality was warranted
Title:  to do well in all climates.  Looking into his eyes, you seemed to
Title:  see there the yet lingering images of those thousand-fold perils he
Title:  had calmly confronted through life.  A staid, steadfast man, whose
Title:  life for the most part was a telling pantomime of action, and not a
Title:  tame chapter of sounds.  Yet, for all his hardy sobriety and
Title:  fortitude, there were certain qualities in him which at times
Title:  affected, and in some cases seemed well nigh to overbalance all the
Title:  rest.  Uncommonly conscientious for a seaman, and endued with a deep
Title:  natural reverence, the wild watery loneliness of his life did
Title:  therefore strongly incline him to superstition; but to that sort of
Title:  superstition, which in some organizations seems rather to spring,
Title:  somehow, from intelligence than from ignorance.  Outward portents and
Title:  inward presentiments were his.  And if at times these things bent the
Title:  welded iron of his soul, much more did his far-away domestic memories
Title:  of his young Cape wife and child, tend to bend him still more from
Title:  the original ruggedness of his nature, and open him still further to
Title:  those latent influences which, in some honest-hearted men, restrain
Title:  the gush of dare-devil daring, so often evinced by others in the more
Title:  perilous vicissitudes of the fishery.  "I will have no man in my
Title:  boat," said Starbuck, "who is not afraid of a whale."  By this, he
Title:  seemed to mean, not only that the most reliable and useful courage
Title:  was that which arises from the fair estimation of the encountered
Title:  peril, but that an utterly fearless man is a far more dangerous
Title:  comrade than a coward.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye," said Stubb, the second mate, "Starbuck, there, is as
Title:  careful a man as you'll find anywhere in this fishery."  But we shall
Title:  ere long see what that word "careful" precisely means when used by a
Title:  man like Stubb, or almost any other whale hunter.
Title:  
Title:  Starbuck was no crusader after perils; in him courage was not a
Title:  sentiment; but a thing simply useful to him, and always at hand upon
Title:  all mortally practical occasions.  Besides, he thought, perhaps, that
Title:  in this business of whaling, courage was one of the great staple
Title:  outfits of the ship, like her beef and her bread, and not to be
Title:  foolishly wasted.  Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whales
Title:  after sun-down; nor for persisting in fighting a fish that too much
Title:  persisted in fighting him.  For, thought Starbuck, I am here in this
Title:  critical ocean to kill whales for my living, and not to be killed by
Title:  them for theirs; and that hundreds of men had been so killed Starbuck
Title:  well knew.  What doom was his own father's?  Where, in the bottomless
Title:  deeps, could he find the torn limbs of his brother?
Title:  
Title:  With memories like these in him, and, moreover, given to a certain
Title:  superstitiousness, as has been said; the courage of this Starbuck
Title:  which could, nevertheless, still flourish, must indeed have been
Title:  extreme.  But it was not in reasonable nature that a man so
Title:  organized, and with such terrible experiences and remembrances as he
Title:  had; it was not in nature that these things should fail in latently
Title:  engendering an element in him, which, under suitable circumstances,
Title:  would break out from its confinement, and burn all his courage up.
Title:  And brave as he might be, it was that sort of bravery chiefly,
Title:  visible in some intrepid men, which, while generally abiding firm in
Title:  the conflict with seas, or winds, or whales, or any of the ordinary
Title:  irrational horrors of the world, yet cannot withstand those more
Title:  terrific, because more spiritual terrors, which sometimes menace you
Title:  from the concentrating brow of an enraged and mighty man.
Title:  
Title:  But were the coming narrative to reveal in any instance, the complete
Title:  abasement of poor Starbuck's fortitude, scarce might I have the heart
Title:  to write it; for it is a thing most sorrowful, nay shocking, to
Title:  expose the fall of valour in the soul.  Men may seem detestable as
Title:  joint stock-companies and nations; knaves, fools, and murderers there
Title:  may be; men may have mean and meagre faces; but man, in the ideal,
Title:  is so noble and so sparkling, such a grand and glowing creature, that
Title:  over any ignominious blemish in him all his fellows should run to
Title:  throw their costliest robes.  That immaculate manliness we feel
Title:  within ourselves, so far within us, that it remains intact though all
Title:  the outer character seem gone; bleeds with keenest anguish at the
Title:  undraped spectacle of a valor-ruined man.  Nor can piety itself, at
Title:  such a shameful sight, completely stifle her upbraidings against the
Title:  permitting stars.  But this august dignity I treat of, is not the
Title:  dignity of kings and robes, but that abounding dignity which has no
Title:  robed investiture.  Thou shalt see it shining in the arm that wields
Title:  a pick or drives a spike; that democratic dignity which, on all
Title:  hands, radiates without end from God; Himself!  The great God
Title:  absolute!  The centre and circumference of all democracy!  His
Title:  omnipresence, our divine equality!
Title:  
Title:  If, then, to meanest mariners, and renegades and castaways, I shall
Title:  hereafter ascribe high qualities, though dark; weave round them
Title:  tragic graces; if even the most mournful, perchance the most abased,
Title:  among them all, shall at times lift himself to the exalted mounts; if
Title:  I shall touch that workman's arm with some ethereal light; if I shall
Title:  spread a rainbow over his disastrous set of sun; then against all
Title:  mortal critics bear me out in it, thou Just Spirit of Equality,
Title:  which hast spread one royal mantle of humanity over all my kind!
Title:  Bear me out in it, thou great democratic God! who didst not refuse to
Title:  the swart convict, Bunyan, the pale, poetic pearl; Thou who didst
Title:  clothe with doubly hammered leaves of finest gold, the stumped and
Title:  paupered arm of old Cervantes; Thou who didst pick up Andrew Jackson
Title:  from the pebbles; who didst hurl him upon a war-horse; who didst
Title:  thunder him higher than a throne!  Thou who, in all Thy mighty,
Title:  earthly marchings, ever cullest Thy selectest champions from the
Title:  kingly commons; bear me out in it, O God!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 27
Title:  
Title:  Knights and Squires.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Stubb was the second mate.  He was a native of Cape Cod; and hence,
Title:  according to local usage, was called a Cape-Cod-man.  A
Title:  happy-go-lucky; neither craven nor valiant; taking perils as they
Title:  came with an indifferent air; and while engaged in the most imminent
Title:  crisis of the chase, toiling away, calm and collected as a journeyman
Title:  joiner engaged for the year.  Good-humored, easy, and careless, he
Title:  presided over his whale-boat as if the most deadly encounter were but
Title:  a dinner, and his crew all invited guests.  He was as particular
Title:  about the comfortable arrangement of his part of the boat, as an
Title:  old stage-driver is about the snugness of his box.  When close to the
Title:  whale, in the very death-lock of the fight, he handled his unpitying
Title:  lance coolly and off-handedly, as a whistling tinker his hammer.  He
Title:  would hum over his old rigadig tunes while flank and flank with the
Title:  most exasperated monster.  Long usage had, for this Stubb, converted
Title:  the jaws of death into an easy chair.  What he thought of death
Title:  itself, there is no telling.  Whether he ever thought of it at all,
Title:  might be a question; but, if he ever did chance to cast his mind that
Title:  way after a comfortable dinner, no doubt, like a good sailor, he took
Title:  it to be a sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft, and bestir
Title:  themselves there, about something which he would find out when he
Title:  obeyed the order, and not sooner.
Title:  
Title:  What, perhaps, with other things, made Stubb such an easy-going,
Title:  unfearing man, so cheerily trudging off with the burden of life in a
Title:  world full of grave pedlars, all bowed to the ground with their
Title:  packs; what helped to bring about that almost impious good-humor of
Title:  his; that thing must have been his pipe.  For, like his nose, his
Title:  short, black little pipe was one of the regular features of his face.
Title:  You would almost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunk
Title:  without his nose as without his pipe.  He kept a whole row of pipes
Title:  there ready loaded, stuck in a rack, within easy reach of his hand;
Title:  and, whenever he turned in, he smoked them all out in succession,
Title:  lighting one from the other to the end of the chapter; then loading
Title:  them again to be in readiness anew.  For, when Stubb dressed, instead
Title:  of first putting his legs into his trowsers, he put his pipe into his
Title:  mouth.
Title:  
Title:  I say this continual smoking must have been one cause, at least, of
Title:  his peculiar disposition; for every one knows that this earthly air,
Title:  whether ashore or afloat, is terribly infected with the nameless
Title:  miseries of the numberless mortals who have died exhaling it; and as
Title:  in time of the cholera, some people go about with a camphorated
Title:  handkerchief to their mouths; so, likewise, against all mortal
Title:  tribulations, Stubb's tobacco smoke might have operated as a sort of
Title:  disinfecting agent.
Title:  
Title:  The third mate was Flask, a native of Tisbury, in Martha's Vineyard.
Title:  A short, stout, ruddy young fellow, very pugnacious concerning
Title:  whales, who somehow seemed to think that the great leviathans had
Title:  personally and hereditarily affronted him; and therefore it was a
Title:  sort of point of honour with him, to destroy them whenever
Title:  encountered.  So utterly lost was he to all sense of reverence for
Title:  the many marvels of their majestic bulk and mystic ways; and so dead
Title:  to anything like an apprehension of any possible danger from
Title:  encountering them; that in his poor opinion, the wondrous whale was
Title:  but a species of magnified mouse, or at least water-rat, requiring
Title:  only a little circumvention and some small application of time and
Title:  trouble in order to kill and boil.  This ignorant, unconscious
Title:  fearlessness of his made him a little waggish in the matter of
Title:  whales; he followed these fish for the fun of it; and a three years'
Title:  voyage round Cape Horn was only a jolly joke that lasted that length
Title:  of time.  As a carpenter's nails are divided into wrought nails and
Title:  cut nails; so mankind may be similarly divided.  Little Flask was one
Title:  of the wrought ones; made to clinch tight and last long.  They called
Title:  him King-Post on board of the Pequod; because, in form, he could be
Title:  well likened to the short, square timber known by that name in Arctic
Title:  whalers; and which by the means of many radiating side timbers
Title:  inserted into it, serves to brace the ship against the icy
Title:  concussions of those battering seas.
Title:  
Title:  Now these three mates--Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, were momentous
Title:  men.  They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of the
Title:  Pequod's boats as headsmen.  In that grand order of battle in which
Title:  Captain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on the
Title:  whales, these three headsmen were as captains of companies.  Or,
Title:  being armed with their long keen whaling spears, they were as a
Title:  picked trio of lancers; even as the harpooneers were flingers of
Title:  javelins.
Title:  
Title:  And since in this famous fishery, each mate or headsman, like a
Title:  Gothic Knight of old, is always accompanied by his boat-steerer or
Title:  harpooneer, who in certain conjunctures provides him with a fresh
Title:  lance, when the former one has been badly twisted, or elbowed in the
Title:  assault; and moreover, as there generally subsists between the two, a
Title:  close intimacy and friendliness; it is therefore but meet, that in
Title:  this place we set down who the Pequod's harpooneers were, and to what
Title:  headsman each of them belonged.
Title:  
Title:  First of all was Queequeg, whom Starbuck, the chief mate, had
Title:  selected for his squire.  But Queequeg is already known.
Title:  
Title:  Next was Tashtego, an unmixed Indian from Gay Head, the most westerly
Title:  promontory of Martha's Vineyard, where there still exists the last
Title:  remnant of a village of red men, which has long supplied the
Title:  neighboring island of Nantucket with many of her most daring
Title:  harpooneers.  In the fishery, they usually go by the generic name of
Title:  Gay-Headers.  Tashtego's long, lean, sable hair, his high cheek
Title:  bones, and black rounding eyes--for an Indian, Oriental in their
Title:  largeness, but Antarctic in their glittering expression--all this
Title:  sufficiently proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of
Title:  those proud warrior hunters, who, in quest of the great New England
Title:  moose, had scoured, bow in hand, the aboriginal forests of the main.
Title:  But no longer snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the
Title:  woodland, Tashtego now hunted in the wake of the great whales of the
Title:  sea; the unerring harpoon of the son fitly replacing the infallible
Title:  arrow of the sires.  To look at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky
Title:  limbs, you would almost have credited the superstitions of some of
Title:  the earlier Puritans, and half-believed this wild Indian to be a son
Title:  of the Prince of the Powers of the Air.  Tashtego was Stubb the
Title:  second mate's squire.
Title:  
Title:  Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo, a gigantic, coal-black
Title:  negro-savage, with a lion-like tread--an Ahasuerus to behold.
Title:  Suspended from his ears were two golden hoops, so large that the
Title:  sailors called them ring-bolts, and would talk of securing the
Title:  top-sail halyards to them.  In his youth Daggoo had voluntarily
Title:  shipped on board of a whaler, lying in a lonely bay on his native
Title:  coast.  And never having been anywhere in the world but in Africa,
Title:  Nantucket, and the pagan harbors most frequented by whalemen; and
Title:  having now led for many years the bold life of the fishery in the
Title:  ships of owners uncommonly heedful of what manner of men they
Title:  shipped; Daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues, and erect as a
Title:  giraffe, moved about the decks in all the pomp of six feet five in
Title:  his socks.  There was a corporeal humility in looking up at him; and
Title:  a white man standing before him seemed a white flag come to beg truce
Title:  of a fortress.  Curious to tell, this imperial negro, Ahasuerus
Title:  Daggoo, was the Squire of little Flask, who looked like a chess-man
Title:  beside him.  As for the residue of the Pequod's company, be it said,
Title:  that at the present day not one in two of the many thousand men
Title:  before the mast employed in the American whale fishery, are Americans
Title:  born, though pretty nearly all the officers are.  Herein it is the
Title:  same with the American whale fishery as with the American army and
Title:  military and merchant navies, and the engineering forces employed in
Title:  the construction of the American Canals and Railroads.  The same, I
Title:  say, because in all these cases the native American liberally
Title:  provides the brains, the rest of the world as generously supplying
Title:  the muscles.  No small number of these whaling seamen belong to the
Title:  Azores, where the outward bound Nantucket whalers frequently touch to
Title:  augment their crews from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores.
Title:  In like manner, the Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or London,
Title:  put in at the Shetland Islands, to receive the full complement of
Title:  their crew.  Upon the passage homewards, they drop them there again.
Title:  How it is, there is no telling, but Islanders seem to make the best
Title:  whalemen.  They were nearly all Islanders in the Pequod, ISOLATOES
Title:  too, I call such, not acknowledging the common continent of men, but
Title:  each ISOLATO living on a separate continent of his own.  Yet now,
Title:  federated along one keel, what a set these Isolatoes were!  An
Title:  Anacharsis Clootz deputation from all the isles of the sea, and all
Title:  the ends of the earth, accompanying Old Ahab in the Pequod to lay the
Title:  world's grievances before that bar from which not very many of them
Title:  ever come back.  Black Little Pip--he never did--oh, no! he went
Title:  before.  Poor Alabama boy!  On the grim Pequod's forecastle, ye shall
Title:  ere long see him, beating his tambourine; prelusive of the eternal
Title:  time, when sent for, to the great quarter-deck on high, he was bid
Title:  strike in with angels, and beat his tambourine in glory; called a
Title:  coward here, hailed a hero there!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 28
Title:  
Title:  Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  For several days after leaving Nantucket, nothing above hatches was
Title:  seen of Captain Ahab.  The mates regularly relieved each other at the
Title:  watches, and for aught that could be seen to the contrary, they
Title:  seemed to be the only commanders of the ship; only they sometimes
Title:  issued from the cabin with orders so sudden and peremptory, that
Title:  after all it was plain they but commanded vicariously.  Yes, their
Title:  supreme lord and dictator was there, though hitherto unseen by any
Title:  eyes not permitted to penetrate into the now sacred retreat of the
Title:  cabin.
Title:  
Title:  Every time I ascended to the deck from my watches below, I instantly
Title:  gazed aft to mark if any strange face were visible; for my first
Title:  vague disquietude touching the unknown captain, now in the seclusion
Title:  of the sea, became almost a perturbation.  This was strangely
Title:  heightened at times by the ragged Elijah's diabolical incoherences
Title:  uninvitedly recurring to me, with a subtle energy I could not have
Title:  before conceived of.  But poorly could I withstand them, much as in
Title:  other moods I was almost ready to smile at the solemn whimsicalities
Title:  of that outlandish prophet of the wharves.  But whatever it was of
Title:  apprehensiveness or uneasiness--to call it so--which I felt, yet
Title:  whenever I came to look about me in the ship, it seemed against all
Title:  warrantry to cherish such emotions.  For though the harpooneers, with
Title:  the great body of the crew, were a far more barbaric, heathenish, and
Title:  motley set than any of the tame merchant-ship companies which my
Title:  previous experiences had made me acquainted with, still I ascribed
Title:  this--and rightly ascribed it--to the fierce uniqueness of the very
Title:  nature of that wild Scandinavian vocation in which I had so
Title:  abandonedly embarked.  But it was especially the aspect of the three
Title:  chief officers of the ship, the mates, which was most forcibly
Title:  calculated to allay these colourless misgivings, and induce confidence
Title:  and cheerfulness in every presentment of the voyage.  Three better,
Title:  more likely sea-officers and men, each in his own different way,
Title:  could not readily be found, and they were every one of them
Title:  Americans; a Nantucketer, a Vineyarder, a Cape man.  Now, it being
Title:  Christmas when the ship shot from out her harbor, for a space we had
Title:  biting Polar weather, though all the time running away from it to the
Title:  southward; and by every degree and minute of latitude which we
Title:  sailed, gradually leaving that merciless winter, and all its
Title:  intolerable weather behind us.  It was one of those less lowering,
Title:  but still grey and gloomy enough mornings of the transition, when
Title:  with a fair wind the ship was rushing through the water with a
Title:  vindictive sort of leaping and melancholy rapidity, that as I mounted
Title:  to the deck at the call of the forenoon watch, so soon as I levelled
Title:  my glance towards the taffrail, foreboding shivers ran over me.
Title:  Reality outran apprehension; Captain Ahab stood upon his
Title:  quarter-deck.
Title:  
Title:  There seemed no sign of common bodily illness about him, nor of the
Title:  recovery from any.  He looked like a man cut away from the stake,
Title:  when the fire has overrunningly wasted all the limbs without
Title:  consuming them, or taking away one particle from their compacted aged
Title:  robustness.  His whole high, broad form, seemed made of solid bronze,
Title:  and shaped in an unalterable mould, like Cellini's cast Perseus.
Title:  Threading its way out from among his grey hairs, and continuing right
Title:  down one side of his tawny scorched face and neck, till it
Title:  disappeared in his clothing, you saw a slender rod-like mark, lividly
Title:  whitish.  It resembled that perpendicular seam sometimes made in the
Title:  straight, lofty trunk of a great tree, when the upper lightning
Title:  tearingly darts down it, and without wrenching a single twig, peels
Title:  and grooves out the bark from top to bottom, ere running off into the
Title:  soil, leaving the tree still greenly alive, but branded.  Whether
Title:  that mark was born with him, or whether it was the scar left by some
Title:  desperate wound, no one could certainly say.  By some tacit consent,
Title:  throughout the voyage little or no allusion was made to it,
Title:  especially by the mates.  But once Tashtego's senior, an old Gay-Head
Title:  Indian among the crew, superstitiously asserted that not till he was
Title:  full forty years old did Ahab become that way branded, and then it
Title:  came upon him, not in the fury of any mortal fray, but in an
Title:  elemental strife at sea.  Yet, this wild hint seemed inferentially
Title:  negatived, by what a grey Manxman insinuated, an old sepulchral man,
Title:  who, having never before sailed out of Nantucket, had never ere this
Title:  laid eye upon wild Ahab.  Nevertheless, the old sea-traditions, the
Title:  immemorial credulities, popularly invested this old Manxman with
Title:  preternatural powers of discernment.  So that no white sailor
Title:  seriously contradicted him when he said that if ever Captain Ahab
Title:  should be tranquilly laid out--which might hardly come to pass, so he
Title:  muttered--then, whoever should do that last office for the dead,
Title:  would find a birth-mark on him from crown to sole.
Title:  
Title:  So powerfully did the whole grim aspect of Ahab affect me, and the
Title:  livid brand which streaked it, that for the first few moments I
Title:  hardly noted that not a little of this overbearing grimness was owing
Title:  to the barbaric white leg upon which he partly stood.  It had
Title:  previously come to me that this ivory leg had at sea been fashioned
Title:  from the polished bone of the sperm whale's jaw.  "Aye, he was
Title:  dismasted off Japan," said the old Gay-Head Indian once; "but like
Title:  his dismasted craft, he shipped another mast without coming home for
Title:  it.  He has a quiver of 'em."
Title:  
Title:  I was struck with the singular posture he maintained.  Upon each side
Title:  of the Pequod's quarter deck, and pretty close to the mizzen shrouds,
Title:  there was an auger hole, bored about half an inch or so, into the
Title:  plank.  His bone leg steadied in that hole; one arm elevated, and
Title:  holding by a shroud; Captain Ahab stood erect, looking straight out
Title:  beyond the ship's ever-pitching prow.  There was an infinity of
Title:  firmest fortitude, a determinate, unsurrenderable wilfulness, in the
Title:  fixed and fearless, forward dedication of that glance.  Not a word he
Title:  spoke; nor did his officers say aught to him; though by all their
Title:  minutest gestures and expressions, they plainly showed the uneasy, if
Title:  not painful, consciousness of being under a troubled master-eye.  And
Title:  not only that, but moody stricken Ahab stood before them with a
Title:  crucifixion in his face; in all the nameless regal overbearing
Title:  dignity of some mighty woe.
Title:  
Title:  Ere long, from his first visit in the air, he withdrew into his
Title:  cabin.  But after that morning, he was every day visible to the crew;
Title:  either standing in his pivot-hole, or seated upon an ivory stool he
Title:  had; or heavily walking the deck.  As the sky grew less gloomy;
Title:  indeed, began to grow a little genial, he became still less and less
Title:  a recluse; as if, when the ship had sailed from home, nothing but the
Title:  dead wintry bleakness of the sea had then kept him so secluded.  And,
Title:  by and by, it came to pass, that he was almost continually in the
Title:  air; but, as yet, for all that he said, or perceptibly did, on the at
Title:  last sunny deck, he seemed as unnecessary there as another mast.  But
Title:  the Pequod was only making a passage now; not regularly cruising;
Title:  nearly all whaling preparatives needing supervision the mates were
Title:  fully competent to, so that there was little or nothing, out of
Title:  himself, to employ or excite Ahab, now; and thus chase away, for that
Title:  one interval, the clouds that layer upon layer were piled upon his
Title:  brow, as ever all clouds choose the loftiest peaks to pile themselves
Title:  upon.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, ere long, the warm, warbling persuasiveness of the
Title:  pleasant, holiday weather we came to, seemed gradually to charm him
Title:  from his mood.  For, as when the red-cheeked, dancing girls, April
Title:  and May, trip home to the wintry, misanthropic woods; even the
Title:  barest, ruggedest, most thunder-cloven old oak will at least send
Title:  forth some few green sprouts, to welcome such glad-hearted visitants;
Title:  so Ahab did, in the end, a little respond to the playful allurings of
Title:  that girlish air.  More than once did he put forth the faint blossom
Title:  of a look, which, in any other man, would have soon flowered out in a
Title:  smile.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 29
Title:  
Title:  Enter Ahab; to Him, Stubb.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Some days elapsed, and ice and icebergs all astern, the Pequod now
Title:  went rolling through the bright Quito spring, which, at sea, almost
Title:  perpetually reigns on the threshold of the eternal August of the
Title:  Tropic.  The warmly cool, clear, ringing, perfumed, overflowing,
Title:  redundant days, were as crystal goblets of Persian sherbet, heaped
Title:  up--flaked up, with rose-water snow.  The starred and stately nights
Title:  seemed haughty dames in jewelled velvets, nursing at home in lonely
Title:  pride, the memory of their absent conquering Earls, the golden
Title:  helmeted suns!  For sleeping man, 'twas hard to choose between such
Title:  winsome days and such seducing nights.  But all the witcheries of
Title:  that unwaning weather did not merely lend new spells and potencies to
Title:  the outward world.  Inward they turned upon the soul, especially when
Title:  the still mild hours of eve came on; then, memory shot her crystals
Title:  as the clear ice most forms of noiseless twilights.  And all these
Title:  subtle agencies, more and more they wrought on Ahab's texture.
Title:  
Title:  Old age is always wakeful; as if, the longer linked with life, the
Title:  less man has to do with aught that looks like death.  Among
Title:  sea-commanders, the old greybeards will oftenest leave their berths
Title:  to visit the night-cloaked deck.  It was so with Ahab; only that now,
Title:  of late, he seemed so much to live in the open air, that truly
Title:  speaking, his visits were more to the cabin, than from the cabin to
Title:  the planks.  "It feels like going down into one's tomb,"--he would
Title:  mutter to himself--"for an old captain like me to be descending this
Title:  narrow scuttle, to go to my grave-dug berth."
Title:  
Title:  So, almost every twenty-four hours, when the watches of the night
Title:  were set, and the band on deck sentinelled the slumbers of the band
Title:  below; and when if a rope was to be hauled upon the forecastle, the
Title:  sailors flung it not rudely down, as by day, but with some
Title:  cautiousness dropt it to its place for fear of disturbing their
Title:  slumbering shipmates; when this sort of steady quietude would begin
Title:  to prevail, habitually, the silent steersman would watch the
Title:  cabin-scuttle; and ere long the old man would emerge, gripping at the
Title:  iron banister, to help his crippled way.  Some considering touch of
Title:  humanity was in him; for at times like these, he usually abstained
Title:  from patrolling the quarter-deck; because to his wearied mates,
Title:  seeking repose within six inches of his ivory heel, such would have
Title:  been the reverberating crack and din of that bony step, that their
Title:  dreams would have been on the crunching teeth of sharks.  But once,
Title:  the mood was on him too deep for common regardings; and as with
Title:  heavy, lumber-like pace he was measuring the ship from taffrail to
Title:  mainmast, Stubb, the old second mate, came up from below, with a
Title:  certain unassured, deprecating humorousness, hinted that if Captain
Title:  Ahab was pleased to walk the planks, then, no one could say nay; but
Title:  there might be some way of muffling the noise; hinting something
Title:  indistinctly and hesitatingly about a globe of tow, and the insertion
Title:  into it, of the ivory heel.  Ah!  Stubb, thou didst not know Ahab
Title:  then.
Title:  
Title:  "Am I a cannon-ball, Stubb," said Ahab, "that thou wouldst wad me
Title:  that fashion?  But go thy ways; I had forgot.  Below to thy nightly
Title:  grave; where such as ye sleep between shrouds, to use ye to the
Title:  filling one at last.--Down, dog, and kennel!"
Title:  
Title:  Starting at the unforseen concluding exclamation of the so suddenly
Title:  scornful old man, Stubb was speechless a moment; then said excitedly,
Title:  "I am not used to be spoken to that way, sir; I do but less than half
Title:  like it, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Avast! gritted Ahab between his set teeth, and violently moving
Title:  away, as if to avoid some passionate temptation.
Title:  
Title:  "No, sir; not yet," said Stubb, emboldened, "I will not tamely be
Title:  called a dog, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Then be called ten times a donkey, and a mule, and an ass, and
Title:  begone, or I'll clear the world of thee!"
Title:  
Title:  As he said this, Ahab advanced upon him with such overbearing terrors
Title:  in his aspect, that Stubb involuntarily retreated.
Title:  
Title:  "I was never served so before without giving a hard blow for it,"
Title:  muttered Stubb, as he found himself descending the cabin-scuttle.
Title:  "It's very queer.  Stop, Stubb; somehow, now, I don't well know
Title:  whether to go back and strike him, or--what's that?--down here on my
Title:  knees and pray for him?  Yes, that was the thought coming up in me;
Title:  but it would be the first time I ever DID pray.  It's queer; very
Title:  queer; and he's queer too; aye, take him fore and aft, he's about the
Title:  queerest old man Stubb ever sailed with.  How he flashed at me!--his
Title:  eyes like powder-pans! is he mad?  Anyway there's something on his
Title:  mind, as sure as there must be something on a deck when it cracks.
Title:  He aint in his bed now, either, more than three hours out of the
Title:  twenty-four; and he don't sleep then.  Didn't that Dough-Boy, the
Title:  steward, tell me that of a morning he always finds the old man's
Title:  hammock clothes all rumpled and tumbled, and the sheets down at the
Title:  foot, and the coverlid almost tied into knots, and the pillow a sort
Title:  of frightful hot, as though a baked brick had been on it?  A hot old
Title:  man!  I guess he's got what some folks ashore call a conscience; it's
Title:  a kind of Tic-Dolly-row they say--worse nor a toothache.  Well, well;
Title:  I don't know what it is, but the Lord keep me from catching it.  He's
Title:  full of riddles; I wonder what he goes into the after hold for, every
Title:  night, as Dough-Boy tells me he suspects; what's that for, I should
Title:  like to know?  Who's made appointments with him in the hold?  Ain't
Title:  that queer, now?  But there's no telling, it's the old game--Here
Title:  goes for a snooze.  Damn me, it's worth a fellow's while to be born
Title:  into the world, if only to fall right asleep.  And now that I think
Title:  of it, that's about the first thing babies do, and that's a sort of
Title:  queer, too.  Damn me, but all things are queer, come to think of 'em.
Title:  But that's against my principles.  Think not, is my eleventh
Title:  commandment; and sleep when you can, is my twelfth--So here goes
Title:  again.  But how's that? didn't he call me a dog? blazes! he called me
Title:  ten times a donkey, and piled a lot of jackasses on top of THAT!  He
Title:  might as well have kicked me, and done with it.  Maybe he DID kick
Title:  me, and I didn't observe it, I was so taken all aback with his brow,
Title:  somehow.  It flashed like a bleached bone.  What the devil's the
Title:  matter with me?  I don't stand right on my legs.  Coming afoul of
Title:  that old man has a sort of turned me wrong side out.  By the Lord, I
Title:  must have been dreaming, though--How? how? how?--but the only way's
Title:  to stash it; so here goes to hammock again; and in the morning, I'll
Title:  see how this plaguey juggling thinks over by daylight."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 30
Title:  
Title:  The Pipe.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  When Stubb had departed, Ahab stood for a while leaning over the
Title:  bulwarks; and then, as had been usual with him of late, calling a
Title:  sailor of the watch, he sent him below for his ivory stool, and also
Title:  his pipe.  Lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the
Title:  stool on the weather side of the deck, he sat and smoked.
Title:  
Title:  In old Norse times, the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings were
Title:  fabricated, saith tradition, of the tusks of the narwhale.  How could
Title:  one look at Ahab then, seated on that tripod of bones, without
Title:  bethinking him of the royalty it symbolized?  For a Khan of the
Title:  plank, and a king of the sea, and a great lord of Leviathans was
Title:  Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  Some moments passed, during which the thick vapour came from his mouth
Title:  in quick and constant puffs, which blew back again into his face.
Title:  "How now," he soliloquized at last, withdrawing the tube, "this
Title:  smoking no longer soothes.  Oh, my pipe! hard must it go with me if
Title:  thy charm be gone!  Here have I been unconsciously toiling, not
Title:  pleasuring--aye, and ignorantly smoking to windward all the while; to
Title:  windward, and with such nervous whiffs, as if, like the dying whale,
Title:  my final jets were the strongest and fullest of trouble.  What
Title:  business have I with this pipe?  This thing that is meant for
Title:  sereneness, to send up mild white vapours among mild white hairs, not
Title:  among torn iron-grey locks like mine.  I'll smoke no more--"
Title:  
Title:  He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea.  The fire hissed in
Title:  the waves; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinking
Title:  pipe made.  With slouched hat, Ahab lurchingly paced the planks.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 31
Title:  
Title:  Queen Mab.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Next morning Stubb accosted Flask.
Title:  
Title:  "Such a queer dream, King-Post, I never had.  You know the old man's
Title:  ivory leg, well I dreamed he kicked me with it; and when I tried to
Title:  kick back, upon my soul, my little man, I kicked my leg right off!
Title:  And then, presto!  Ahab seemed a pyramid, and I, like a blazing fool,
Title:  kept kicking at it.  But what was still more curious, Flask--you know
Title:  how curious all dreams are--through all this rage that I was in, I
Title:  somehow seemed to be thinking to myself, that after all, it was not
Title:  much of an insult, that kick from Ahab.  'Why,' thinks I, 'what's the
Title:  row?  It's not a real leg, only a false leg.'  And there's a mighty
Title:  difference between a living thump and a dead thump.  That's what
Title:  makes a blow from the hand, Flask, fifty times more savage to bear
Title:  than a blow from a cane.  The living member--that makes the living
Title:  insult, my little man.  And thinks I to myself all the while, mind,
Title:  while I was stubbing my silly toes against that cursed pyramid--so
Title:  confoundedly contradictory was it all, all the while, I say, I was
Title:  thinking to myself, 'what's his leg now, but a cane--a whalebone
Title:  cane.  Yes,' thinks I, 'it was only a playful cudgelling--in fact,
Title:  only a whaleboning that he gave me--not a base kick.  Besides,'
Title:  thinks I, 'look at it once; why, the end of it--the foot part--what a
Title:  small sort of end it is; whereas, if a broad footed farmer kicked me,
Title:  THERE'S a devilish broad insult.  But this insult is whittled down to
Title:  a point only.'  But now comes the greatest joke of the dream, Flask.
Title:  While I was battering away at the pyramid, a sort of badger-haired
Title:  old merman, with a hump on his back, takes me by the shoulders, and
Title:  slews me round.  'What are you 'bout?' says he.  Slid! man, but I was
Title:  frightened.  Such a phiz!  But, somehow, next moment I was over the
Title:  fright.  'What am I about?' says I at last.  'And what business is
Title:  that of yours, I should like to know, Mr. Humpback?  Do YOU want a
Title:  kick?'  By the lord, Flask, I had no sooner said that, than he turned
Title:  round his stern to me, bent over, and dragging up a lot of seaweed he
Title:  had for a clout--what do you think, I saw?--why thunder alive, man,
Title:  his stern was stuck full of marlinspikes, with the points out.  Says
Title:  I, on second thoughts, 'I guess I won't kick you, old fellow.'  'Wise
Title:  Stubb,' said he, 'wise Stubb;' and kept muttering it all the time, a
Title:  sort of eating of his own gums like a chimney hag.  Seeing he wasn't
Title:  going to stop saying over his 'wise Stubb, wise Stubb,' I thought I
Title:  might as well fall to kicking the pyramid again.  But I had only just
Title:  lifted my foot for it, when he roared out, 'Stop that kicking!'
Title:  'Halloa,' says I, 'what's the matter now, old fellow?'  'Look ye
Title:  here,' says he; 'let's argue the insult.  Captain Ahab kicked ye,
Title:  didn't he?'  'Yes, he did,' says I--'right HERE it was.'  'Very
Title:  good,' says he--'he used his ivory leg, didn't he?'  'Yes, he did,'
Title:  says I.  'Well then,' says he, 'wise Stubb, what have you to complain
Title:  of?  Didn't he kick with right good will? it wasn't a common pitch
Title:  pine leg he kicked with, was it?  No, you were kicked by a great man,
Title:  and with a beautiful ivory leg, Stubb.  It's an honour; I consider it
Title:  an honour.  Listen, wise Stubb.  In old England the greatest lords
Title:  think it great glory to be slapped by a queen, and made
Title:  garter-knights of; but, be YOUR boast, Stubb, that ye were kicked by
Title:  old Ahab, and made a wise man of.  Remember what I say; BE kicked by
Title:  him; account his kicks honours; and on no account kick back; for you
Title:  can't help yourself, wise Stubb.  Don't you see that pyramid?'  With
Title:  that, he all of a sudden seemed somehow, in some queer fashion, to
Title:  swim off into the air.  I snored; rolled over; and there I was in my
Title:  hammock!  Now, what do you think of that dream, Flask?"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know; it seems a sort of foolish to me, tho.'"
Title:  
Title:  "May be; may be.  But it's made a wise man of me, Flask.  D'ye see
Title:  Ahab standing there, sideways looking over the stern?  Well, the best
Title:  thing you can do, Flask, is to let the old man alone; never speak to
Title:  him, whatever he says.  Halloa!  What's that he shouts?  Hark!"
Title:  
Title:  "Mast-head, there!  Look sharp, all of ye!  There are whales
Title:  hereabouts!
Title:  
Title:  If ye see a white one, split your lungs for him!
Title:  
Title:  "What do you think of that now, Flask? ain't there a small drop of
Title:  something queer about that, eh?  A white whale--did ye mark that,
Title:  man?  Look ye--there's something special in the wind.  Stand by for
Title:  it, Flask.  Ahab has that that's bloody on his mind.  But, mum; he
Title:  comes this way."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 32
Title:  
Title:  Cetology.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Already we are boldly launched upon the deep; but soon we shall be
Title:  lost in its unshored, harbourless immensities.  Ere that come to pass;
Title:  ere the Pequod's weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled
Title:  hulls of the leviathan; at the outset it is but well to attend to a
Title:  matter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding
Title:  of the more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all
Title:  sorts which are to follow.
Title:  
Title:  It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera,
Title:  that I would now fain put before you.  Yet is it no easy task.  The
Title:  classification of the constituents of a chaos, nothing less is here
Title:  essayed.  Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid
Title:  down.
Title:  
Title:  "No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is entitled
Title:  Cetology," says Captain Scoresby, A.D. 1820.
Title:  
Title:  "It is not my intention, were it in my power, to enter into the
Title:  inquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups and
Title:  families....  Utter confusion exists among the historians of this
Title:  animal" (sperm whale), says Surgeon Beale, A.D. 1839.
Title:  
Title:  "Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters."
Title:  "Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea."  "A field
Title:  strewn with thorns."  "All these incomplete indications but serve to
Title:  torture us naturalists."
Title:  
Title:  Thus speak of the whale, the great Cuvier, and John Hunter, and
Title:  Lesson, those lights of zoology and anatomy.  Nevertheless, though of
Title:  real knowledge there be little, yet of books there are a plenty; and
Title:  so in some small degree, with cetology, or the science of whales.
Title:  Many are the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen,
Title:  who have at large or in little, written of the whale.  Run over a
Title:  few:--The Authors of the Bible; Aristotle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; Sir
Title:  Thomas Browne; Gesner; Ray; Linnaeus; Rondeletius; Willoughby; Green;
Title:  Artedi; Sibbald; Brisson; Marten; Lacepede; Bonneterre; Desmarest;
Title:  Baron Cuvier; Frederick Cuvier; John Hunter; Owen; Scoresby; Beale;
Title:  Bennett; J.  Ross Browne; the Author of Miriam Coffin; Olmstead; and
Title:  the Rev.  T.  Cheever.  But to what ultimate generalizing purpose all
Title:  these have written, the above cited extracts will show.
Title:  
Title:  Of the names in this list of whale authors, only those following Owen
Title:  ever saw living whales; and but one of them was a real professional
Title:  harpooneer and whaleman.  I mean Captain Scoresby.  On the separate
Title:  subject of the Greenland or right-whale, he is the best existing
Title:  authority.  But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the great
Title:  sperm whale, compared with which the Greenland whale is almost
Title:  unworthy mentioning.  And here be it said, that the Greenland whale
Title:  is an usurper upon the throne of the seas.  He is not even by any
Title:  means the largest of the whales.  Yet, owing to the long priority of
Title:  his claims, and the profound ignorance which, till some seventy years
Title:  back, invested the then fabulous or utterly unknown sperm-whale, and
Title:  which ignorance to this present day still reigns in all but some few
Title:  scientific retreats and whale-ports; this usurpation has been every
Title:  way complete.  Reference to nearly all the leviathanic allusions in
Title:  the great poets of past days, will satisfy you that the Greenland
Title:  whale, without one rival, was to them the monarch of the seas.  But
Title:  the time has at last come for a new proclamation.  This is Charing
Title:  Cross; hear ye! good people all,--the Greenland whale is
Title:  deposed,--the great sperm whale now reigneth!
Title:  
Title:  There are only two books in being which at all pretend to put the
Title:  living sperm whale before you, and at the same time, in the remotest
Title:  degree succeed in the attempt.  Those books are Beale's and
Title:  Bennett's; both in their time surgeons to English South-Sea
Title:  whale-ships, and both exact and reliable men.  The original matter
Title:  touching the sperm whale to be found in their volumes is necessarily
Title:  small; but so far as it goes, it is of excellent quality, though
Title:  mostly confined to scientific description.  As yet, however, the
Title:  sperm whale, scientific or poetic, lives not complete in any
Title:  literature.  Far above all other hunted whales, his is an unwritten
Title:  life.
Title:  
Title:  Now the various species of whales need some sort of popular
Title:  comprehensive classification, if only an easy outline one for the
Title:  present, hereafter to be filled in all its departments by subsequent
Title:  laborers.  As no better man advances to take this matter in hand, I
Title:  hereupon offer my own poor endeavors.  I promise nothing complete;
Title:  because any human thing supposed to be complete, must for that very
Title:  reason infallibly be faulty.  I shall not pretend to a minute
Title:  anatomical description of the various species, or--in this place at
Title:  least--to much of any description.  My object here is simply to
Title:  project the draught of a systematization of cetology.  I am the
Title:  architect, not the builder.
Title:  
Title:  But it is a ponderous task; no ordinary letter-sorter in the
Title:  Post-Office is equal to it.  To grope down into the bottom of the sea
Title:  after them; to have one's hands among the unspeakable foundations,
Title:  ribs, and very pelvis of the world; this is a fearful thing.  What am
Title:  I that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan!  The awful
Title:  tauntings in Job might well appal me.  "Will he the (leviathan) make
Title:  a covenant with thee?  Behold the hope of him is vain!  But I have
Title:  swam through libraries and sailed through oceans; I have had to do
Title:  with whales with these visible hands; I am in earnest; and I will
Title:  try.  There are some preliminaries to settle.
Title:  
Title:  First: The uncertain, unsettled condition of this science of Cetology
Title:  is in the very vestibule attested by the fact, that in some quarters
Title:  it still remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish.  In his
Title:  System of Nature, A.D. 1776, Linnaeus declares, "I hereby separate
Title:  the whales from the fish."  But of my own knowledge, I know that down
Title:  to the year 1850, sharks and shad, alewives and herring, against
Title:  Linnaeus's express edict, were still found dividing the possession of
Title:  the same seas with the Leviathan.
Title:  
Title:  The grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have banished the whales
Title:  from the waters, he states as follows: "On account of their warm
Title:  bilocular heart, their lungs, their movable eyelids, their hollow
Title:  ears, penem intrantem feminam mammis lactantem," and finally, "ex
Title:  lege naturae jure meritoque."  I submitted all this to my friends
Title:  Simeon Macey and Charley Coffin, of Nantucket, both messmates of mine
Title:  in a certain voyage, and they united in the opinion that the reasons
Title:  set forth were altogether insufficient.  Charley profanely hinted
Title:  they were humbug.
Title:  
Title:  Be it known that, waiving all argument, I take the good old fashioned
Title:  ground that the whale is a fish, and call upon holy Jonah to back me.
Title:  This fundamental thing settled, the next point is, in what internal
Title:  respect does the whale differ from other fish.  Above, Linnaeus has
Title:  given you those items.  But in brief, they are these: lungs and warm
Title:  blood; whereas, all other fish are lungless and cold blooded.
Title:  
Title:  Next: how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so as
Title:  conspicuously to label him for all time to come?  To be short, then,
Title:  a whale is A SPOUTING FISH WITH A HORIZONTAL TAIL.  There you have
Title:  him.  However contracted, that definition is the result of expanded
Title:  meditation.  A walrus spouts much like a whale, but the walrus is not
Title:  a fish, because he is amphibious.  But the last term of the
Title:  definition is still more cogent, as coupled with the first.  Almost
Title:  any one must have noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have
Title:  not a flat, but a vertical, or up-and-down tail.  Whereas, among
Title:  spouting fish the tail, though it may be similarly shaped, invariably
Title:  assumes a horizontal position.
Title:  
Title:  By the above definition of what a whale is, I do by no means exclude
Title:  from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto identified
Title:  with the whale by the best informed Nantucketers; nor, on the other
Title:  hand, link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as
Title:  alien.*  Hence, all the smaller, spouting, and horizontal tailed fish
Title:  must be included in this ground-plan of Cetology.  Now, then, come
Title:  the grand divisions of the entire whale host.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *I am aware that down to the present time, the fish styled Lamatins
Title:  and Dugongs (Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket) are
Title:  included by many naturalists among the whales.  But as these pig-fish
Title:  are a noisy, contemptible set, mostly lurking in the mouths of
Title:  rivers, and feeding on wet hay, and especially as they do not spout,
Title:  I deny their credentials as whales; and have presented them with
Title:  their passports to quit the Kingdom of Cetology.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  First: According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary
Title:  BOOKS (subdivisible into CHAPTERS), and these shall comprehend them
Title:  all, both small and large.
Title:  
Title:  I. THE FOLIO WHALE; II. the OCTAVO WHALE; III. the DUODECIMO WHALE.
Title:  
Title:  As the type of the FOLIO I present the SPERM WHALE; of the OCTAVO,
Title:  the GRAMPUS; of the DUODECIMO, the PORPOISE.
Title:  
Title:  FOLIOS.  Among these I here include the following chapters:--I. The
Title:  SPERM WHALE; II. the RIGHT WHALE; III. the FIN-BACK WHALE; IV. the
Title:  HUMP-BACKED WHALE; V. the RAZOR-BACK WHALE; VI. the SULPHUR-BOTTOM
Title:  WHALE.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK I. (FOLIO), CHAPTER I. (SPERM WHALE).--This whale, among the
Title:  English of old vaguely known as the Trumpa whale, and the Physeter
Title:  whale, and the Anvil Headed whale, is the present Cachalot of the
Title:  French, and the Pottsfich of the Germans, and the Macrocephalus of
Title:  the Long Words.  He is, without doubt, the largest inhabitant of the
Title:  globe; the most formidable of all whales to encounter; the most
Title:  majestic in aspect; and lastly, by far the most valuable in commerce;
Title:  he being the only creature from which that valuable substance,
Title:  spermaceti, is obtained.  All his peculiarities will, in many other
Title:  places, be enlarged upon.  It is chiefly with his name that I now
Title:  have to do.  Philologically considered, it is absurd.  Some centuries
Title:  ago, when the Sperm whale was almost wholly unknown in his own
Title:  proper individuality, and when his oil was only accidentally obtained
Title:  from the stranded fish; in those days spermaceti, it would seem, was
Title:  popularly supposed to be derived from a creature identical with the
Title:  one then known in England as the Greenland or Right Whale.  It was
Title:  the idea also, that this same spermaceti was that quickening humor of
Title:  the Greenland Whale which the first syllable of the word literally
Title:  expresses.  In those times, also, spermaceti was exceedingly scarce,
Title:  not being used for light, but only as an ointment and medicament.  It
Title:  was only to be had from the druggists as you nowadays buy an ounce of
Title:  rhubarb.  When, as I opine, in the course of time, the true nature of
Title:  spermaceti became known, its original name was still retained by the
Title:  dealers; no doubt to enhance its value by a notion so strangely
Title:  significant of its scarcity.  And so the appellation must at last
Title:  have come to be bestowed upon the whale from which this spermaceti
Title:  was really derived.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK I. (FOLIO), CHAPTER II. (RIGHT WHALE).--In one respect this is
Title:  the most venerable of the leviathans, being the one first regularly
Title:  hunted by man.  It yields the article commonly known as whalebone or
Title:  baleen; and the oil specially known as "whale oil," an inferior
Title:  article in commerce.  Among the fishermen, he is indiscriminately
Title:  designated by all the following titles: The Whale; the Greenland
Title:  Whale; the Black Whale; the Great Whale; the True Whale; the Right
Title:  Whale.  There is a deal of obscurity concerning the identity of the
Title:  species thus multitudinously baptised.  What then is the whale, which
Title:  I include in the second species of my Folios?  It is the Great
Title:  Mysticetus of the English naturalists; the Greenland Whale of the
Title:  English whalemen; the Baliene Ordinaire of the French whalemen; the
Title:  Growlands Walfish of the Swedes.  It is the whale which for more than
Title:  two centuries past has been hunted by the Dutch and English in the
Title:  Arctic seas; it is the whale which the American fishermen have long
Title:  pursued in the Indian ocean, on the Brazil Banks, on the Nor' West
Title:  Coast, and various other parts of the world, designated by them Right
Title:  Whale Cruising Grounds.
Title:  
Title:  Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of the
Title:  English and the right whale of the Americans.  But they precisely
Title:  agree in all their grand features; nor has there yet been presented a
Title:  single determinate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction.
Title:  It is by endless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive
Title:  differences, that some departments of natural history become so
Title:  repellingly intricate.  The right whale will be elsewhere treated of
Title:  at some length, with reference to elucidating the sperm whale.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK I. (FOLIO), CHAPTER III. (FIN-BACK).--Under this head I reckon a
Title:  monster which, by the various names of Fin-Back, Tall-Spout, and
Title:  Long-John, has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly the
Title:  whale whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossing
Title:  the Atlantic, in the New York packet-tracks.  In the length he
Title:  attains, and in his baleen, the Fin-back resembles the right whale,
Title:  but is of a less portly girth, and a lighter colour, approaching to
Title:  olive.  His great lips present a cable-like aspect, formed by the
Title:  intertwisting, slanting folds of large wrinkles.  His grand
Title:  distinguishing feature, the fin, from which he derives his name, is
Title:  often a conspicuous object.  This fin is some three or four feet
Title:  long, growing vertically from the hinder part of the back, of an
Title:  angular shape, and with a very sharp pointed end.  Even if not the
Title:  slightest other part of the creature be visible, this isolated fin
Title:  will, at times, be seen plainly projecting from the surface.  When
Title:  the sea is moderately calm, and slightly marked with spherical
Title:  ripples, and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon
Title:  the wrinkled surface, it may well be supposed that the watery circle
Title:  surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial, with its style and wavy
Title:  hour-lines graved on it.  On that Ahaz-dial the shadow often goes
Title:  back.  The Fin-Back is not gregarious.  He seems a whale-hater, as
Title:  some men are man-haters.  Very shy; always going solitary;
Title:  unexpectedly rising to the surface in the remotest and most sullen
Title:  waters; his straight and single lofty jet rising like a tall
Title:  misanthropic spear upon a barren plain; gifted with such wondrous
Title:  power and velocity in swimming, as to defy all present pursuit from
Title:  man; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of his
Title:  race, bearing for his mark that style upon his back.  From having the
Title:  baleen in his mouth, the Fin-Back is sometimes included with the
Title:  right whale, among a theoretic species denominated WHALEBONE WHALES,
Title:  that is, whales with baleen.  Of these so called Whalebone whales,
Title:  there would seem to be several varieties, most of which, however, are
Title:  little known.  Broad-nosed whales and beaked whales; pike-headed
Title:  whales; bunched whales; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales, are
Title:  the fishermen's names for a few sorts.
Title:  
Title:  In connection with this appellative of "Whalebone whales," it is of
Title:  great importance to mention, that however such a nomenclature may be
Title:  convenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales, yet it
Title:  is in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan,
Title:  founded upon either his baleen, or hump, or fin, or teeth;
Title:  notwithstanding that those marked parts or features very obviously
Title:  seem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system of
Title:  Cetology than any other detached bodily distinctions, which the
Title:  whale, in his kinds, presents.  How then?  The baleen, hump,
Title:  back-fin, and teeth; these are things whose peculiarities are
Title:  indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales, without any
Title:  regard to what may be the nature of their structure in other and
Title:  more essential particulars.  Thus, the sperm whale and the humpbacked
Title:  whale, each has a hump; but there the similitude ceases.  Then, this
Title:  same humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale, each of these has
Title:  baleen; but there again the similitude ceases.  And it is just the
Title:  same with the other parts above mentioned.  In various sorts of
Title:  whales, they form such irregular combinations; or, in the case of any
Title:  one of them detached, such an irregular isolation; as utterly to defy
Title:  all general methodization formed upon such a basis.  On this rock
Title:  every one of the whale-naturalists has split.
Title:  
Title:  But it may possibly be conceived that, in the internal parts of the
Title:  whale, in his anatomy--there, at least, we shall be able to hit the
Title:  right classification.  Nay; what thing, for example, is there in the
Title:  Greenland whale's anatomy more striking than his baleen?  Yet we have
Title:  seen that by his baleen it is impossible correctly to classify the
Title:  Greenland whale.  And if you descend into the bowels of the various
Title:  leviathans, why there you will not find distinctions a fiftieth part
Title:  as available to the systematizer as those external ones already
Title:  enumerated.  What then remains? nothing but to take hold of the
Title:  whales bodily, in their entire liberal volume, and boldly sort them
Title:  that way.  And this is the Bibliographical system here adopted; and
Title:  it is the only one that can possibly succeed, for it alone is
Title:  practicable.  To proceed.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK I. (FOLIO) CHAPTER IV. (HUMP-BACK).--This whale is often seen on
Title:  the northern American coast.  He has been frequently captured there,
Title:  and towed into harbor.  He has a great pack on him like a peddler; or
Title:  you might call him the Elephant and Castle whale.  At any rate, the
Title:  popular name for him does not sufficiently distinguish him, since the
Title:  sperm whale also has a hump though a smaller one.  His oil is not
Title:  very valuable.  He has baleen.  He is the most gamesome and
Title:  light-hearted of all the whales, making more gay foam and white water
Title:  generally than any other of them.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK I. (FOLIO), CHAPTER V. (RAZOR-BACK).--Of this whale little is
Title:  known but his name.  I have seen him at a distance off Cape Horn.  Of
Title:  a retiring nature, he eludes both hunters and philosophers.  Though
Title:  no coward, he has never yet shown any part of him but his back, which
Title:  rises in a long sharp ridge.  Let him go.  I know little more of him,
Title:  nor does anybody else.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK I. (FOLIO), CHAPTER VI. (SULPHUR-BOTTOM).--Another retiring
Title:  gentleman, with a brimstone belly, doubtless got by scraping along
Title:  the Tartarian tiles in some of his profounder divings.  He is seldom
Title:  seen; at least I have never seen him except in the remoter southern
Title:  seas, and then always at too great a distance to study his
Title:  countenance.  He is never chased; he would run away with rope-walks
Title:  of line.  Prodigies are told of him.  Adieu, Sulphur Bottom!  I can
Title:  say nothing more that is true of ye, nor can the oldest Nantucketer.
Title:  
Title:  Thus ends BOOK I. (FOLIO), and now begins BOOK II. (OCTAVO).
Title:  
Title:  OCTAVOES.*--These embrace the whales of middling magnitude, among
Title:  which present may be numbered:--I., the GRAMPUS; II., the BLACK FISH;
Title:  III., the NARWHALE; IV., the THRASHER; V., the KILLER.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *Why this book of whales is not denominated the Quarto is very plain.
Title:  Because, while the whales of this order, though smaller than those
Title:  of the former order, nevertheless retain a proportionate likeness to
Title:  them in figure, yet the bookbinder's Quarto volume in its dimensioned
Title:  form does not preserve the shape of the Folio volume, but the Octavo
Title:  volume does.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  BOOK II. (OCTAVO), CHAPTER I. (GRAMPUS).--Though this fish, whose
Title:  loud sonorous breathing, or rather blowing, has furnished a proverb
Title:  to landsmen, is so well known a denizen of the deep, yet is he not
Title:  popularly classed among whales.  But possessing all the grand
Title:  distinctive features of the leviathan, most naturalists have
Title:  recognised him for one.  He is of moderate octavo size, varying from
Title:  fifteen to twenty-five feet in length, and of corresponding
Title:  dimensions round the waist.  He swims in herds; he is never regularly
Title:  hunted, though his oil is considerable in quantity, and pretty good
Title:  for light.  By some fishermen his approach is regarded as premonitory
Title:  of the advance of the great sperm whale.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK II. (OCTAVO), CHAPTER II. (BLACK FISH).--I give the popular
Title:  fishermen's names for all these fish, for generally they are the
Title:  best.  Where any name happens to be vague or inexpressive, I shall
Title:  say so, and suggest another.  I do so now, touching the Black Fish,
Title:  so-called, because blackness is the rule among almost all whales.
Title:  So, call him the Hyena Whale, if you please.  His voracity is well
Title:  known, and from the circumstance that the inner angles of his lips
Title:  are curved upwards, he carries an everlasting Mephistophelean grin on
Title:  his face.  This whale averages some sixteen or eighteen feet in
Title:  length.  He is found in almost all latitudes.  He has a peculiar way
Title:  of showing his dorsal hooked fin in swimming, which looks something
Title:  like a Roman nose.  When not more profitably employed, the sperm
Title:  whale hunters sometimes capture the Hyena whale, to keep up the
Title:  supply of cheap oil for domestic employment--as some frugal
Title:  housekeepers, in the absence of company, and quite alone by
Title:  themselves, burn unsavory tallow instead of odorous wax.  Though
Title:  their blubber is very thin, some of these whales will yield you
Title:  upwards of thirty gallons of oil.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK II. (OCTAVO), CHAPTER III. (NARWHALE), that is, NOSTRIL
Title:  WHALE.--Another instance of a curiously named whale, so named I
Title:  suppose from his peculiar horn being originally mistaken for a peaked
Title:  nose.  The creature is some sixteen feet in length, while its horn
Title:  averages five feet, though some exceed ten, and even attain to
Title:  fifteen feet.  Strictly speaking, this horn is but a lengthened tusk,
Title:  growing out from the jaw in a line a little depressed from the
Title:  horizontal.  But it is only found on the sinister side, which has an
Title:  ill effect, giving its owner something analogous to the aspect of a
Title:  clumsy left-handed man.  What precise purpose this ivory horn or
Title:  lance answers, it would be hard to say.  It does not seem to be used
Title:  like the blade of the sword-fish and bill-fish; though some sailors
Title:  tell me that the Narwhale employs it for a rake in turning over the
Title:  bottom of the sea for food.  Charley Coffin said it was used for an
Title:  ice-piercer; for the Narwhale, rising to the surface of the Polar
Title:  Sea, and finding it sheeted with ice, thrusts his horn up, and so
Title:  breaks through.  But you cannot prove either of these surmises to be
Title:  correct.  My own opinion is, that however this one-sided horn may
Title:  really be used by the Narwhale--however that may be--it would
Title:  certainly be very convenient to him for a folder in reading
Title:  pamphlets.  The Narwhale I have heard called the Tusked whale, the
Title:  Horned whale, and the Unicorn whale.  He is certainly a curious
Title:  example of the Unicornism to be found in almost every kingdom of
Title:  animated nature.  From certain cloistered old authors I have gathered
Title:  that this same sea-unicorn's horn was in ancient days regarded as the
Title:  great antidote against poison, and as such, preparations of it
Title:  brought immense prices.  It was also distilled to a volatile salts
Title:  for fainting ladies, the same way that the horns of the male deer are
Title:  manufactured into hartshorn.  Originally it was in itself accounted
Title:  an object of great curiosity.  Black Letter tells me that Sir Martin
Title:  Frobisher on his return from that voyage, when Queen Bess did
Title:  gallantly wave her jewelled hand to him from a window of Greenwich
Title:  Palace, as his bold ship sailed down the Thames; "when Sir Martin
Title:  returned from that voyage," saith Black Letter, "on bended knees he
Title:  presented to her highness a prodigious long horn of the Narwhale,
Title:  which for a long period after hung in the castle at Windsor."  An
Title:  Irish author avers that the Earl of Leicester, on bended knees, did
Title:  likewise present to her highness another horn, pertaining to a land
Title:  beast of the unicorn nature.
Title:  
Title:  The Narwhale has a very picturesque, leopard-like look, being of a
Title:  milk-white ground colour, dotted with round and oblong spots of black.
Title:  His oil is very superior, clear and fine; but there is little of it,
Title:  and he is seldom hunted.  He is mostly found in the circumpolar seas.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK II. (OCTAVO), CHAPTER IV. (KILLER).--Of this whale little is
Title:  precisely known to the Nantucketer, and nothing at all to the
Title:  professed naturalist.  From what I have seen of him at a distance,
Title:  I should say that he was about the bigness of a grampus.  He is very
Title:  savage--a sort of Feegee fish.  He sometimes takes the great Folio
Title:  whales by the lip, and hangs there like a leech, till the mighty
Title:  brute is worried to death.  The Killer is never hunted.  I never
Title:  heard what sort of oil he has.  Exception might be taken to the name
Title:  bestowed upon this whale, on the ground of its indistinctness.  For
Title:  we are all killers, on land and on sea; Bonapartes and Sharks
Title:  included.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK II. (OCTAVO), CHAPTER V. (THRASHER).--This gentleman is famous
Title:  for his tail, which he uses for a ferule in thrashing his foes.  He
Title:  mounts the Folio whale's back, and as he swims, he works his passage
Title:  by flogging him; as some schoolmasters get along in the world by a
Title:  similar process.  Still less is known of the Thrasher than of the
Title:  Killer.  Both are outlaws, even in the lawless seas.
Title:  
Title:  Thus ends BOOK II. (OCTAVO), and begins BOOK III. (DUODECIMO).
Title:  
Title:  DUODECIMOES.--These include the smaller whales.  I. The Huzza
Title:  Porpoise.  II. The Algerine Porpoise.  III. The Mealy-mouthed
Title:  Porpoise.
Title:  
Title:  To those who have not chanced specially to study the subject, it may
Title:  possibly seem strange, that fishes not commonly exceeding four or
Title:  five feet should be marshalled among WHALES--a word, which, in the
Title:  popular sense, always conveys an idea of hugeness.  But the creatures
Title:  set down above as Duodecimoes are infallibly whales, by the terms of
Title:  my definition of what a whale is--i.e. a spouting fish, with a
Title:  horizontal tail.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK III. (DUODECIMO), CHAPTER 1. (HUZZA PORPOISE).--This is the
Title:  common porpoise found almost all over the globe.  The name is of my
Title:  own bestowal; for there are more than one sort of porpoises, and
Title:  something must be done to distinguish them.  I call him thus, because
Title:  he always swims in hilarious shoals, which upon the broad sea keep
Title:  tossing themselves to heaven like caps in a Fourth-of-July crowd.
Title:  Their appearance is generally hailed with delight by the mariner.
Title:  Full of fine spirits, they invariably come from the breezy billows to
Title:  windward.  They are the lads that always live before the wind.  They
Title:  are accounted a lucky omen.  If you yourself can withstand three
Title:  cheers at beholding these vivacious fish, then heaven help ye; the
Title:  spirit of godly gamesomeness is not in ye.  A well-fed, plump Huzza
Title:  Porpoise will yield you one good gallon of good oil.  But the fine
Title:  and delicate fluid extracted from his jaws is exceedingly valuable.
Title:  It is in request among jewellers and watchmakers.  Sailors put it on
Title:  their hones.  Porpoise meat is good eating, you know.  It may never
Title:  have occurred to you that a porpoise spouts.  Indeed, his spout is so
Title:  small that it is not very readily discernible.  But the next time you
Title:  have a chance, watch him; and you will then see the great Sperm whale
Title:  himself in miniature.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK III. (DUODECIMO), CHAPTER II. (ALGERINE PORPOISE).--A pirate.
Title:  Very savage.  He is only found, I think, in the Pacific.  He is
Title:  somewhat larger than the Huzza Porpoise, but much of the same general
Title:  make.  Provoke him, and he will buckle to a shark.  I have lowered
Title:  for him many times, but never yet saw him captured.
Title:  
Title:  BOOK III. (DUODECIMO), CHAPTER III. (MEALY-MOUTHED PORPOISE).--The
Title:  largest kind of Porpoise; and only found in the Pacific, so far as it
Title:  is known.  The only English name, by which he has hitherto been
Title:  designated, is that of the fishers--Right-Whale Porpoise, from the
Title:  circumstance that he is chiefly found in the vicinity of that Folio.
Title:  In shape, he differs in some degree from the Huzza Porpoise, being of
Title:  a less rotund and jolly girth; indeed, he is of quite a neat and
Title:  gentleman-like figure.  He has no fins on his back (most other
Title:  porpoises have), he has a lovely tail, and sentimental Indian eyes of
Title:  a hazel hue.  But his mealy-mouth spoils all.  Though his entire
Title:  back down to his side fins is of a deep sable, yet a boundary line,
Title:  distinct as the mark in a ship's hull, called the "bright waist,"
Title:  that line streaks him from stem to stern, with two separate colours,
Title:  black above and white below.  The white comprises part of his head,
Title:  and the whole of his mouth, which makes him look as if he had just
Title:  escaped from a felonious visit to a meal-bag.  A most mean and mealy
Title:  aspect!  His oil is much like that of the common porpoise.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Beyond the DUODECIMO, this system does not proceed, inasmuch as the
Title:  Porpoise is the smallest of the whales.  Above, you have all the
Title:  Leviathans of note.  But there are a rabble of uncertain, fugitive,
Title:  half-fabulous whales, which, as an American whaleman, I know by
Title:  reputation, but not personally.  I shall enumerate them by their
Title:  fore-castle appellations; for possibly such a list may be valuable to
Title:  future investigators, who may complete what I have here but begun.
Title:  If any of the following whales, shall hereafter be caught and marked,
Title:  then he can readily be incorporated into this System, according to
Title:  his Folio, Octavo, or Duodecimo magnitude:--The Bottle-Nose Whale;
Title:  the Junk Whale; the Pudding-Headed Whale; the Cape Whale; the Leading
Title:  Whale; the Cannon Whale; the Scragg Whale; the Coppered Whale; the
Title:  Elephant Whale; the Iceberg Whale; the Quog Whale; the Blue Whale; etc.
Title:  From Icelandic, Dutch, and old English authorities, there might
Title:  be quoted other lists of uncertain whales, blessed with all manner of
Title:  uncouth names.  But I omit them as altogether obsolete; and can
Title:  hardly help suspecting them for mere sounds, full of Leviathanism,
Title:  but signifying nothing.
Title:  
Title:  Finally: It was stated at the outset, that this system would not be
Title:  here, and at once, perfected.  You cannot but plainly see that I have
Title:  kept my word.  But I now leave my cetological System standing thus
Title:  unfinished, even as the great Cathedral of Cologne was left, with the
Title:  crane still standing upon the top of the uncompleted tower.  For
Title:  small erections may be finished by their first architects; grand
Title:  ones, true ones, ever leave the copestone to posterity.  God keep me
Title:  from ever completing anything.  This whole book is but a
Title:  draught--nay, but the draught of a draught.  Oh, Time, Strength,
Title:  Cash, and Patience!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 33
Title:  
Title:  The Specksynder.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Concerning the officers of the whale-craft, this seems as good a
Title:  place as any to set down a little domestic peculiarity on ship-board,
Title:  arising from the existence of the harpooneer class of officers, a
Title:  class unknown of course in any other marine than the whale-fleet.
Title:  
Title:  The large importance attached to the harpooneer's vocation is evinced
Title:  by the fact, that originally in the old Dutch Fishery, two centuries
Title:  and more ago, the command of a whale ship was not wholly lodged in
Title:  the person now called the captain, but was divided between him and an
Title:  officer called the Specksynder.  Literally this word means
Title:  Fat-Cutter; usage, however, in time made it equivalent to Chief
Title:  Harpooneer.  In those days, the captain's authority was restricted to
Title:  the navigation and general management of the vessel; while over the
Title:  whale-hunting department and all its concerns, the Specksynder or
Title:  Chief Harpooneer reigned supreme.  In the British Greenland Fishery,
Title:  under the corrupted title of Specksioneer, this old Dutch official is
Title:  still retained, but his former dignity is sadly abridged.  At present
Title:  he ranks simply as senior Harpooneer; and as such, is but one of the
Title:  captain's more inferior subalterns.  Nevertheless, as upon the good
Title:  conduct of the harpooneers the success of a whaling voyage largely
Title:  depends, and since in the American Fishery he is not only an
Title:  important officer in the boat, but under certain circumstances (night
Title:  watches on a whaling ground) the command of the ship's deck is also
Title:  his; therefore the grand political maxim of the sea demands, that he
Title:  should nominally live apart from the men before the mast, and be in
Title:  some way distinguished as their professional superior; though always,
Title:  by them, familiarly regarded as their social equal.
Title:  
Title:  Now, the grand distinction drawn between officer and man at sea, is
Title:  this--the first lives aft, the last forward.  Hence, in whale-ships
Title:  and merchantmen alike, the mates have their quarters with the
Title:  captain; and so, too, in most of the American whalers the harpooneers
Title:  are lodged in the after part of the ship.  That is to say, they take
Title:  their meals in the captain's cabin, and sleep in a place indirectly
Title:  communicating with it.
Title:  
Title:  Though the long period of a Southern whaling voyage (by far the
Title:  longest of all voyages now or ever made by man), the peculiar perils
Title:  of it, and the community of interest prevailing among a company, all
Title:  of whom, high or low, depend for their profits, not upon fixed wages,
Title:  but upon their common luck, together with their common vigilance,
Title:  intrepidity, and hard work; though all these things do in some cases
Title:  tend to beget a less rigorous discipline than in merchantmen
Title:  generally; yet, never mind how much like an old Mesopotamian family
Title:  these whalemen may, in some primitive instances, live together; for
Title:  all that, the punctilious externals, at least, of the quarter-deck
Title:  are seldom materially relaxed, and in no instance done away.  Indeed,
Title:  many are the Nantucket ships in which you will see the skipper
Title:  parading his quarter-deck with an elated grandeur not surpassed in
Title:  any military navy; nay, extorting almost as much outward homage as if
Title:  he wore the imperial purple, and not the shabbiest of pilot-cloth.
Title:  
Title:  And though of all men the moody captain of the Pequod was the least
Title:  given to that sort of shallowest assumption; and though the only
Title:  homage he ever exacted, was implicit, instantaneous obedience; though
Title:  he required no man to remove the shoes from his feet ere stepping
Title:  upon the quarter-deck; and though there were times when, owing to
Title:  peculiar circumstances connected with events hereafter to be
Title:  detailed, he addressed them in unusual terms, whether of
Title:  condescension or IN TERROREM, or otherwise; yet even Captain Ahab was
Title:  by no means unobservant of the paramount forms and usages of the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Nor, perhaps, will it fail to be eventually perceived, that behind
Title:  those forms and usages, as it were, he sometimes masked himself;
Title:  incidentally making use of them for other and more private ends than
Title:  they were legitimately intended to subserve.  That certain sultanism
Title:  of his brain, which had otherwise in a good degree remained
Title:  unmanifested; through those forms that same sultanism became
Title:  incarnate in an irresistible dictatorship.  For be a man's
Title:  intellectual superiority what it will, it can never assume the
Title:  practical, available supremacy over other men, without the aid of
Title:  some sort of external arts and entrenchments, always, in themselves,
Title:  more or less paltry and base.  This it is, that for ever keeps God's
Title:  true princes of the Empire from the world's hustings; and leaves the
Title:  highest honours that this air can give, to those men who become famous
Title:  more through their infinite inferiority to the choice hidden handful
Title:  of the Divine Inert, than through their undoubted superiority over
Title:  the dead level of the mass.  Such large virtue lurks in these small
Title:  things when extreme political superstitions invest them, that in some
Title:  royal instances even to idiot imbecility they have imparted potency.
Title:  But when, as in the case of Nicholas the Czar, the ringed crown of
Title:  geographical empire encircles an imperial brain; then, the plebeian
Title:  herds crouch abased before the tremendous centralization.  Nor, will
Title:  the tragic dramatist who would depict mortal indomitableness in its
Title:  fullest sweep and direct swing, ever forget a hint, incidentally so
Title:  important in his art, as the one now alluded to.
Title:  
Title:  But Ahab, my Captain, still moves before me in all his Nantucket
Title:  grimness and shagginess; and in this episode touching Emperors and
Title:  Kings, I must not conceal that I have only to do with a poor old
Title:  whale-hunter like him; and, therefore, all outward majestical
Title:  trappings and housings are denied me.  Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand
Title:  in thee, it must needs be plucked at from the skies, and dived for in
Title:  the deep, and featured in the unbodied air!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 34
Title:  
Title:  The Cabin-Table.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It is noon; and Dough-Boy, the steward, thrusting his pale
Title:  loaf-of-bread face from the cabin-scuttle, announces dinner to his
Title:  lord and master; who, sitting in the lee quarter-boat, has just been
Title:  taking an observation of the sun; and is now mutely reckoning the
Title:  latitude on the smooth, medallion-shaped tablet, reserved for that
Title:  daily purpose on the upper part of his ivory leg.  From his complete
Title:  inattention to the tidings, you would think that moody Ahab had not
Title:  heard his menial.  But presently, catching hold of the mizen shrouds,
Title:  he swings himself to the deck, and in an even, unexhilarated voice,
Title:  saying, "Dinner, Mr. Starbuck," disappears into the cabin.
Title:  
Title:  When the last echo of his sultan's step has died away, and Starbuck,
Title:  the first Emir, has every reason to suppose that he is seated, then
Title:  Starbuck rouses from his quietude, takes a few turns along the
Title:  planks, and, after a grave peep into the binnacle, says, with some
Title:  touch of pleasantness, "Dinner, Mr. Stubb," and descends the scuttle.
Title:  The second Emir lounges about the rigging awhile, and then slightly
Title:  shaking the main brace, to see whether it will be all right with
Title:  that important rope, he likewise takes up the old burden, and with a
Title:  rapid "Dinner, Mr. Flask," follows after his predecessors.
Title:  
Title:  But the third Emir, now seeing himself all alone on the quarter-deck,
Title:  seems to feel relieved from some curious restraint; for, tipping all
Title:  sorts of knowing winks in all sorts of directions, and kicking off
Title:  his shoes, he strikes into a sharp but noiseless squall of a hornpipe
Title:  right over the Grand Turk's head; and then, by a dexterous sleight,
Title:  pitching his cap up into the mizentop for a shelf, he goes down
Title:  rollicking so far at least as he remains visible from the deck,
Title:  reversing all other processions, by bringing up the rear with music.
Title:  But ere stepping into the cabin doorway below, he pauses, ships a new
Title:  face altogether, and, then, independent, hilarious little Flask
Title:  enters King Ahab's presence, in the character of Abjectus, or the
Title:  Slave.
Title:  
Title:  It is not the least among the strange things bred by the intense
Title:  artificialness of sea-usages, that while in the open air of the deck
Title:  some officers will, upon provocation, bear themselves boldly and
Title:  defyingly enough towards their commander; yet, ten to one, let those
Title:  very officers the next moment go down to their customary dinner in
Title:  that same commander's cabin, and straightway their inoffensive, not
Title:  to say deprecatory and humble air towards him, as he sits at the head
Title:  of the table; this is marvellous, sometimes most comical.  Wherefore
Title:  this difference?  A problem?  Perhaps not.  To have been Belshazzar,
Title:  King of Babylon; and to have been Belshazzar, not haughtily but
Title:  courteously, therein certainly must have been some touch of mundane
Title:  grandeur.  But he who in the rightly regal and intelligent spirit
Title:  presides over his own private dinner-table of invited guests, that
Title:  man's unchallenged power and dominion of individual influence for the
Title:  time; that man's royalty of state transcends Belshazzar's, for
Title:  Belshazzar was not the greatest.  Who has but once dined his friends,
Title:  has tasted what it is to be Caesar.  It is a witchery of social
Title:  czarship which there is no withstanding.  Now, if to this
Title:  consideration you superadd the official supremacy of a ship-master,
Title:  then, by inference, you will derive the cause of that peculiarity of
Title:  sea-life just mentioned.
Title:  
Title:  Over his ivory-inlaid table, Ahab presided like a mute, maned
Title:  sea-lion on the white coral beach, surrounded by his warlike but
Title:  still deferential cubs.  In his own proper turn, each officer waited
Title:  to be served.  They were as little children before Ahab; and yet, in
Title:  Ahab, there seemed not to lurk the smallest social arrogance.  With
Title:  one mind, their intent eyes all fastened upon the old man's knife, as
Title:  he carved the chief dish before him.  I do not suppose that for the
Title:  world they would have profaned that moment with the slightest
Title:  observation, even upon so neutral a topic as the weather.  No!  And
Title:  when reaching out his knife and fork, between which the slice of beef
Title:  was locked, Ahab thereby motioned Starbuck's plate towards him, the
Title:  mate received his meat as though receiving alms; and cut it tenderly;
Title:  and a little started if, perchance, the knife grazed against the
Title:  plate; and chewed it noiselessly; and swallowed it, not without
Title:  circumspection.  For, like the Coronation banquet at Frankfort, where
Title:  the German Emperor profoundly dines with the seven Imperial
Title:  Electors, so these cabin meals were somehow solemn meals, eaten in
Title:  awful silence; and yet at table old Ahab forbade not conversation;
Title:  only he himself was dumb.  What a relief it was to choking Stubb,
Title:  when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below.  And poor little
Title:  Flask, he was the youngest son, and little boy of this weary family
Title:  party.  His were the shinbones of the saline beef; his would have
Title:  been the drumsticks.  For Flask to have presumed to help himself,
Title:  this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first
Title:  degree.  Had he helped himself at that table, doubtless, never more
Title:  would he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world;
Title:  nevertheless, strange to say, Ahab never forbade him.  And had Flask
Title:  helped himself, the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed
Title:  it.  Least of all, did Flask presume to help himself to butter.
Title:  Whether he thought the owners of the ship denied it to him, on
Title:  account of its clotting his clear, sunny complexion; or whether he
Title:  deemed that, on so long a voyage in such marketless waters, butter
Title:  was at a premium, and therefore was not for him, a subaltern; however
Title:  it was, Flask, alas! was a butterless man!
Title:  
Title:  Another thing.  Flask was the last person down at the dinner, and
Title:  Flask is the first man up.  Consider!  For hereby Flask's dinner was
Title:  badly jammed in point of time.  Starbuck and Stubb both had the start
Title:  of him; and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear.
Title:  If Stubb even, who is but a peg higher than Flask, happens to have
Title:  but a small appetite, and soon shows symptoms of concluding his
Title:  repast, then Flask must bestir himself, he will not get more than
Title:  three mouthfuls that day; for it is against holy usage for Stubb to
Title:  precede Flask to the deck.  Therefore it was that Flask once admitted
Title:  in private, that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of an
Title:  officer, from that moment he had never known what it was to be
Title:  otherwise than hungry, more or less.  For what he ate did not so much
Title:  relieve his hunger, as keep it immortal in him.  Peace and
Title:  satisfaction, thought Flask, have for ever departed from my stomach.
Title:  I am an officer; but, how I wish I could fish a bit of old-fashioned
Title:  beef in the forecastle, as I used to when I was before the mast.
Title:  There's the fruits of promotion now; there's the vanity of glory:
Title:  there's the insanity of life!  Besides, if it were so that any mere
Title:  sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask's official
Title:  capacity, all that sailor had to do, in order to obtain ample
Title:  vengeance, was to go aft at dinner-time, and get a peep at Flask
Title:  through the cabin sky-light, sitting silly and dumfoundered before
Title:  awful Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  Now, Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first
Title:  table in the Pequod's cabin.  After their departure, taking place in
Title:  inverted order to their arrival, the canvas cloth was cleared, or
Title:  rather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward.  And
Title:  then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast, they being its
Title:  residuary legatees.  They made a sort of temporary servants' hall of
Title:  the high and mighty cabin.
Title:  
Title:  In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and nameless
Title:  invisible domineerings of the captain's table, was the entire
Title:  care-free license and ease, the almost frantic democracy of those
Title:  inferior fellows the harpooneers.  While their masters, the mates,
Title:  seemed afraid of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws, the
Title:  harpooneers chewed their food with such a relish that there was a
Title:  report to it.  They dined like lords; they filled their bellies like
Title:  Indian ships all day loading with spices.  Such portentous appetites
Title:  had Queequeg and Tashtego, that to fill out the vacancies made by the
Title:  previous repast, often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a
Title:  great baron of salt-junk, seemingly quarried out of the solid ox.
Title:  And if he were not lively about it, if he did not go with a nimble
Title:  hop-skip-and-jump, then Tashtego had an ungentlemanly way of
Title:  accelerating him by darting a fork at his back, harpoon-wise.  And
Title:  once Daggoo, seized with a sudden humor, assisted Dough-Boy's memory
Title:  by snatching him up bodily, and thrusting his head into a great empty
Title:  wooden trencher, while Tashtego, knife in hand, began laying out the
Title:  circle preliminary to scalping him.  He was naturally a very nervous,
Title:  shuddering sort of little fellow, this bread-faced steward; the
Title:  progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse.  And what with the
Title:  standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab, and the periodical
Title:  tumultuous visitations of these three savages, Dough-Boy's whole life
Title:  was one continual lip-quiver.  Commonly, after seeing the harpooneers
Title:  furnished with all things they demanded, he would escape from their
Title:  clutches into his little pantry adjoining, and fearfully peep out at
Title:  them through the blinds of its door, till all was over.
Title:  
Title:  It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego, opposing
Title:  his filed teeth to the Indian's: crosswise to them, Daggoo seated on
Title:  the floor, for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head to
Title:  the low carlines; at every motion of his colossal limbs, making the
Title:  low cabin framework to shake, as when an African elephant goes
Title:  passenger in a ship.  But for all this, the great negro was
Title:  wonderfully abstemious, not to say dainty.  It seemed hardly possible
Title:  that by such comparatively small mouthfuls he could keep up the
Title:  vitality diffused through so broad, baronial, and superb a person.
Title:  But, doubtless, this noble savage fed strong and drank deep of the
Title:  abounding element of air; and through his dilated nostrils snuffed in
Title:  the sublime life of the worlds.  Not by beef or by bread, are giants
Title:  made or nourished.  But Queequeg, he had a mortal, barbaric smack of
Title:  the lip in eating--an ugly sound enough--so much so, that the
Title:  trembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any marks of teeth
Title:  lurked in his own lean arms.  And when he would hear Tashtego singing
Title:  out for him to produce himself, that his bones might be picked, the
Title:  simple-witted steward all but shattered the crockery hanging round
Title:  him in the pantry, by his sudden fits of the palsy.  Nor did the
Title:  whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets, for their
Title:  lances and other weapons; and with which whetstones, at dinner, they
Title:  would ostentatiously sharpen their knives; that grating sound did not
Title:  at all tend to tranquillize poor Dough-Boy.  How could he forget that
Title:  in his Island days, Queequeg, for one, must certainly have been
Title:  guilty of some murderous, convivial indiscretions.  Alas!  Dough-Boy!
Title:  hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals.  Not a napkin
Title:  should he carry on his arm, but a buckler.  In good time, though, to
Title:  his great delight, the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart;
Title:  to his credulous, fable-mongering ears, all their martial bones
Title:  jingling in them at every step, like Moorish scimetars in scabbards.
Title:  
Title:  But, though these barbarians dined in the cabin, and nominally lived
Title:  there; still, being anything but sedentary in their habits, they were
Title:  scarcely ever in it except at mealtimes, and just before
Title:  sleeping-time, when they passed through it to their own peculiar
Title:  quarters.
Title:  
Title:  In this one matter, Ahab seemed no exception to most American whale
Title:  captains, who, as a set, rather incline to the opinion that by rights
Title:  the ship's cabin belongs to them; and that it is by courtesy alone
Title:  that anybody else is, at any time, permitted there.  So that, in real
Title:  truth, the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might more properly be
Title:  said to have lived out of the cabin than in it.  For when they did
Title:  enter it, it was something as a street-door enters a house; turning
Title:  inwards for a moment, only to be turned out the next; and, as a
Title:  permanent thing, residing in the open air.  Nor did they lose much
Title:  hereby; in the cabin was no companionship; socially, Ahab was
Title:  inaccessible.  Though nominally included in the census of
Title:  Christendom, he was still an alien to it.  He lived in the world, as
Title:  the last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled Missouri.  And as when
Title:  Spring and Summer had departed, that wild Logan of the woods, burying
Title:  himself in the hollow of a tree, lived out the winter there, sucking
Title:  his own paws; so, in his inclement, howling old age, Ahab's soul,
Title:  shut up in the caved trunk of his body, there fed upon the sullen
Title:  paws of its gloom!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 35
Title:  
Title:  The Mast-Head.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was during the more pleasant weather, that in due rotation with
Title:  the other seamen my first mast-head came round.
Title:  
Title:  In most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned almost
Title:  simultaneously with the vessel's leaving her port; even though she
Title:  may have fifteen thousand miles, and more, to sail ere reaching her
Title:  proper cruising ground.  And if, after a three, four, or five years'
Title:  voyage she is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her--say, an
Title:  empty vial even--then, her mast-heads are kept manned to the last;
Title:  and not till her skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port,
Title:  does she altogether relinquish the hope of capturing one whale more.
Title:  
Title:  Now, as the business of standing mast-heads, ashore or afloat, is a
Title:  very ancient and interesting one, let us in some measure expatiate
Title:  here.  I take it, that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the
Title:  old Egyptians; because, in all my researches, I find none prior to
Title:  them.  For though their progenitors, the builders of Babel, must
Title:  doubtless, by their tower, have intended to rear the loftiest
Title:  mast-head in all Asia, or Africa either; yet (ere the final truck was
Title:  put to it) as that great stone mast of theirs may be said to have
Title:  gone by the board, in the dread gale of God's wrath; therefore, we
Title:  cannot give these Babel builders priority over the Egyptians.  And
Title:  that the Egyptians were a nation of mast-head standers, is an
Title:  assertion based upon the general belief among archaeologists, that
Title:  the first pyramids were founded for astronomical purposes: a theory
Title:  singularly supported by the peculiar stair-like formation of all four
Title:  sides of those edifices; whereby, with prodigious long upliftings of
Title:  their legs, those old astronomers were wont to mount to the apex, and
Title:  sing out for new stars; even as the look-outs of a modern ship sing
Title:  out for a sail, or a whale just bearing in sight.  In Saint Stylites,
Title:  the famous Christian hermit of old times, who built him a lofty stone
Title:  pillar in the desert and spent the whole latter portion of his life
Title:  on its summit, hoisting his food from the ground with a tackle; in
Title:  him we have a remarkable instance of a dauntless
Title:  stander-of-mast-heads; who was not to be driven from his place by
Title:  fogs or frosts, rain, hail, or sleet; but valiantly facing everything
Title:  out to the last, literally died at his post.  Of modern
Title:  standers-of-mast-heads we have but a lifeless set; mere stone, iron,
Title:  and bronze men; who, though well capable of facing out a stiff gale,
Title:  are still entirely incompetent to the business of singing out upon
Title:  discovering any strange sight.  There is Napoleon; who, upon the top
Title:  of the column of Vendome, stands with arms folded, some one hundred
Title:  and fifty feet in the air; careless, now, who rules the decks below;
Title:  whether Louis Philippe, Louis Blanc, or Louis the Devil.  Great
Title:  Washington, too, stands high aloft on his towering main-mast in
Title:  Baltimore, and like one of Hercules' pillars, his column marks that
Title:  point of human grandeur beyond which few mortals will go.  Admiral
Title:  Nelson, also, on a capstan of gun-metal, stands his mast-head in
Title:  Trafalgar Square; and ever when most obscured by that London smoke,
Title:  token is yet given that a hidden hero is there; for where there is
Title:  smoke, must be fire.  But neither great Washington, nor Napoleon, nor
Title:  Nelson, will answer a single hail from below, however madly invoked
Title:  to befriend by their counsels the distracted decks upon which they
Title:  gaze; however it may be surmised, that their spirits penetrate
Title:  through the thick haze of the future, and descry what shoals and what
Title:  rocks must be shunned.
Title:  
Title:  It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-head
Title:  standers of the land with those of the sea; but that in truth it is
Title:  not so, is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy, the sole
Title:  historian of Nantucket, stands accountable.  The worthy Obed tells
Title:  us, that in the early times of the whale fishery, ere ships were
Title:  regularly launched in pursuit of the game, the people of that island
Title:  erected lofty spars along the sea-coast, to which the look-outs
Title:  ascended by means of nailed cleats, something as fowls go upstairs in
Title:  a hen-house.  A few years ago this same plan was adopted by the Bay
Title:  whalemen of New Zealand, who, upon descrying the game, gave notice to
Title:  the ready-manned boats nigh the beach.  But this custom has now
Title:  become obsolete; turn we then to the one proper mast-head, that of a
Title:  whale-ship at sea.  The three mast-heads are kept manned from
Title:  sun-rise to sun-set; the seamen taking their regular turns (as at the
Title:  helm), and relieving each other every two hours.  In the serene
Title:  weather of the tropics it is exceedingly pleasant the mast-head; nay,
Title:  to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful.  There you stand, a
Title:  hundred feet above the silent decks, striding along the deep, as if
Title:  the masts were gigantic stilts, while beneath you and between your
Title:  legs, as it were, swim the hugest monsters of the sea, even as ships
Title:  once sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at old Rhodes.
Title:  There you stand, lost in the infinite series of the sea, with nothing
Title:  ruffled but the waves.  The tranced ship indolently rolls; the drowsy
Title:  trade winds blow; everything resolves you into languor.  For the most
Title:  part, in this tropic whaling life, a sublime uneventfulness invests
Title:  you; you hear no news; read no gazettes; extras with startling
Title:  accounts of commonplaces never delude you into unnecessary
Title:  excitements; you hear of no domestic afflictions; bankrupt
Title:  securities; fall of stocks; are never troubled with the thought of
Title:  what you shall have for dinner--for all your meals for three years
Title:  and more are snugly stowed in casks, and your bill of fare is
Title:  immutable.
Title:  
Title:  In one of those southern whalesmen, on a long three or four years'
Title:  voyage, as often happens, the sum of the various hours you spend at
Title:  the mast-head would amount to several entire months.  And it is much
Title:  to be deplored that the place to which you devote so considerable a
Title:  portion of the whole term of your natural life, should be so sadly
Title:  destitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness, or
Title:  adapted to breed a comfortable localness of feeling, such as pertains
Title:  to a bed, a hammock, a hearse, a sentry box, a pulpit, a coach, or
Title:  any other of those small and snug contrivances in which men
Title:  temporarily isolate themselves.  Your most usual point of perch is
Title:  the head of the t' gallant-mast, where you stand upon two thin
Title:  parallel sticks (almost peculiar to whalemen) called the t' gallant
Title:  cross-trees.  Here, tossed about by the sea, the beginner feels about
Title:  as cosy as he would standing on a bull's horns.  To be sure, in cold
Title:  weather you may carry your house aloft with you, in the shape of a
Title:  watch-coat; but properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no more
Title:  of a house than the unclad body; for as the soul is glued inside of
Title:  its fleshy tabernacle, and cannot freely move about in it, nor even
Title:  move out of it, without running great risk of perishing (like an
Title:  ignorant pilgrim crossing the snowy Alps in winter); so a watch-coat
Title:  is not so much of a house as it is a mere envelope, or additional
Title:  skin encasing you.  You cannot put a shelf or chest of drawers in
Title:  your body, and no more can you make a convenient closet of your
Title:  watch-coat.
Title:  
Title:  Concerning all this, it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads of
Title:  a southern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little tents
Title:  or pulpits, called CROW'S-NESTS, in which the look-outs of a
Title:  Greenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather of the
Title:  frozen seas.  In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet, entitled
Title:  "A Voyage among the Icebergs, in quest of the Greenland Whale, and
Title:  incidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies of
Title:  Old Greenland;" in this admirable volume, all standers of mast-heads
Title:  are furnished with a charmingly circumstantial account of the then
Title:  recently invented CROW'S-NEST of the Glacier, which was the name of
Title:  Captain Sleet's good craft.  He called it the SLEET'S CROW'S-NEST, in
Title:  honour of himself; he being the original inventor and patentee, and
Title:  free from all ridiculous false delicacy, and holding that if we call
Title:  our own children after our own names (we fathers being the original
Title:  inventors and patentees), so likewise should we denominate after
Title:  ourselves any other apparatus we may beget.  In shape, the Sleet's
Title:  crow's-nest is something like a large tierce or pipe; it is open
Title:  above, however, where it is furnished with a movable side-screen to
Title:  keep to windward of your head in a hard gale.  Being fixed on the
Title:  summit of the mast, you ascend into it through a little trap-hatch in
Title:  the bottom.  On the after side, or side next the stern of the ship,
Title:  is a comfortable seat, with a locker underneath for umbrellas,
Title:  comforters, and coats.  In front is a leather rack, in which to keep
Title:  your speaking trumpet, pipe, telescope, and other nautical
Title:  conveniences.  When Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head in
Title:  this crow's-nest of his, he tells us that he always had a rifle with
Title:  him (also fixed in the rack), together with a powder flask and shot,
Title:  for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales, or vagrant sea
Title:  unicorns infesting those waters; for you cannot successfully shoot at
Title:  them from the deck owing to the resistance of the water, but to shoot
Title:  down upon them is a very different thing.  Now, it was plainly a
Title:  labor of love for Captain Sleet to describe, as he does, all the
Title:  little detailed conveniences of his crow's-nest; but though he so
Title:  enlarges upon many of these, and though he treats us to a very
Title:  scientific account of his experiments in this crow's-nest, with a
Title:  small compass he kept there for the purpose of counteracting the
Title:  errors resulting from what is called the "local attraction" of all
Title:  binnacle magnets; an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of
Title:  the iron in the ship's planks, and in the Glacier's case, perhaps, to
Title:  there having been so many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew; I
Title:  say, that though the Captain is very discreet and scientific here,
Title:  yet, for all his learned "binnacle deviations," "azimuth compass
Title:  observations," and "approximate errors," he knows very well, Captain
Title:  Sleet, that he was not so much immersed in those profound magnetic
Title:  meditations, as to fail being attracted occasionally towards that
Title:  well replenished little case-bottle, so nicely tucked in on one side
Title:  of his crow's nest, within easy reach of his hand.  Though, upon the
Title:  whole, I greatly admire and even love the brave, the honest, and
Title:  learned Captain; yet I take it very ill of him that he should so
Title:  utterly ignore that case-bottle, seeing what a faithful friend and
Title:  comforter it must have been, while with mittened fingers and hooded
Title:  head he was studying the mathematics aloft there in that bird's nest
Title:  within three or four perches of the pole.
Title:  
Title:  But if we Southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft as
Title:  Captain Sleet and his Greenlandmen were; yet that disadvantage is
Title:  greatly counter-balanced by the widely contrasting serenity of those
Title:  seductive seas in which we South fishers mostly float.  For one, I
Title:  used to lounge up the rigging very leisurely, resting in the top to
Title:  have a chat with Queequeg, or any one else off duty whom I might find
Title:  there; then ascending a little way further, and throwing a lazy leg
Title:  over the top-sail yard, take a preliminary view of the watery
Title:  pastures, and so at last mount to my ultimate destination.
Title:  
Title:  Let me make a clean breast of it here, and frankly admit that I kept
Title:  but sorry guard.  With the problem of the universe revolving in me,
Title:  how could I--being left completely to myself at such a
Title:  thought-engendering altitude--how could I but lightly hold my
Title:  obligations to observe all whale-ships' standing orders, "Keep your
Title:  weather eye open, and sing out every time."
Title:  
Title:  And let me in this place movingly admonish you, ye ship-owners of
Title:  Nantucket!  Beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any lad
Title:  with lean brow and hollow eye; given to unseasonable meditativeness;
Title:  and who offers to ship with the Phaedon instead of Bowditch in his
Title:  head.  Beware of such an one, I say; your whales must be seen before
Title:  they can be killed; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow you
Title:  ten wakes round the world, and never make you one pint of sperm the
Title:  richer.  Nor are these monitions at all unneeded.  For nowadays, the
Title:  whale-fishery furnishes an asylum for many romantic, melancholy, and
Title:  absent-minded young men, disgusted with the carking cares of earth,
Title:  and seeking sentiment in tar and blubber.  Childe Harold not
Title:  unfrequently perches himself upon the mast-head of some luckless
Title:  disappointed whale-ship, and in moody phrase ejaculates:--
Title:  
Title:  "Roll on, thou deep and dark blue ocean, roll!  Ten thousand
Title:  blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain."
Title:  
Title:  Very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-minded
Title:  young philosophers to task, upbraiding them with not feeling
Title:  sufficient "interest" in the voyage; half-hinting that they are so
Title:  hopelessly lost to all honourable ambition, as that in their secret
Title:  souls they would rather not see whales than otherwise.  But all in
Title:  vain; those young Platonists have a notion that their vision is
Title:  imperfect; they are short-sighted; what use, then, to strain the
Title:  visual nerve?  They have left their opera-glasses at home.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, thou monkey," said a harpooneer to one of these lads, "we've
Title:  been cruising now hard upon three years, and thou hast not raised a
Title:  whale yet.  Whales are scarce as hen's teeth whenever thou art up
Title:  here."  Perhaps they were; or perhaps there might have been shoals of
Title:  them in the far horizon; but lulled into such an opium-like
Title:  listlessness of vacant, unconscious reverie is this absent-minded
Title:  youth by the blending cadence of waves with thoughts, that at last he
Title:  loses his identity; takes the mystic ocean at his feet for the
Title:  visible image of that deep, blue, bottomless soul, pervading mankind
Title:  and nature; and every strange, half-seen, gliding, beautiful thing
Title:  that eludes him; every dimly-discovered, uprising fin of some
Title:  undiscernible form, seems to him the embodiment of those elusive
Title:  thoughts that only people the soul by continually flitting through
Title:  it.  In this enchanted mood, thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came;
Title:  becomes diffused through time and space; like Crammer's sprinkled
Title:  Pantheistic ashes, forming at last a part of every shore the round
Title:  globe over.
Title:  
Title:  There is no life in thee, now, except that rocking life imparted by a
Title:  gently rolling ship; by her, borrowed from the sea; by the sea, from
Title:  the inscrutable tides of God.  But while this sleep, this dream is on
Title:  ye, move your foot or hand an inch; slip your hold at all; and your
Title:  identity comes back in horror.  Over Descartian vortices you hover.
Title:  And perhaps, at mid-day, in the fairest weather, with one
Title:  half-throttled shriek you drop through that transparent air into the
Title:  summer sea, no more to rise for ever.  Heed it well, ye Pantheists!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 36
Title:  
Title:  The Quarter-Deck.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  (ENTER AHAB: THEN, ALL)
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was not a great while after the affair of the pipe, that one
Title:  morning shortly after breakfast, Ahab, as was his wont, ascended the
Title:  cabin-gangway to the deck.  There most sea-captains usually walk at
Title:  that hour, as country gentlemen, after the same meal, take a few
Title:  turns in the garden.
Title:  
Title:  Soon his steady, ivory stride was heard, as to and fro he paced his
Title:  old rounds, upon planks so familiar to his tread, that they were all
Title:  over dented, like geological stones, with the peculiar mark of his
Title:  walk.  Did you fixedly gaze, too, upon that ribbed and dented brow;
Title:  there also, you would see still stranger foot-prints--the foot-prints
Title:  of his one unsleeping, ever-pacing thought.
Title:  
Title:  But on the occasion in question, those dents looked deeper, even as
Title:  his nervous step that morning left a deeper mark.  And, so full of
Title:  his thought was Ahab, that at every uniform turn that he made, now at
Title:  the main-mast and now at the binnacle, you could almost see that
Title:  thought turn in him as he turned, and pace in him as he paced; so
Title:  completely possessing him, indeed, that it all but seemed the inward
Title:  mould of every outer movement.
Title:  
Title:  "D'ye mark him, Flask?" whispered Stubb; "the chick that's in him
Title:  pecks the shell.  'Twill soon be out."
Title:  
Title:  The hours wore on;--Ahab now shut up within his cabin; anon, pacing
Title:  the deck, with the same intense bigotry of purpose in his aspect.
Title:  
Title:  It drew near the close of day.  Suddenly he came to a halt by the
Title:  bulwarks, and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there, and
Title:  with one hand grasping a shroud, he ordered Starbuck to send
Title:  everybody aft.
Title:  
Title:  "Sir!" said the mate, astonished at an order seldom or never given on
Title:  ship-board except in some extraordinary case.
Title:  
Title:  "Send everybody aft," repeated Ahab.  "Mast-heads, there! come down!"
Title:  
Title:  When the entire ship's company were assembled, and with curious and
Title:  not wholly unapprehensive faces, were eyeing him, for he looked not
Title:  unlike the weather horizon when a storm is coming up, Ahab, after
Title:  rapidly glancing over the bulwarks, and then darting his eyes among
Title:  the crew, started from his standpoint; and as though not a soul were
Title:  nigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck.  With bent head and
Title:  half-slouched hat he continued to pace, unmindful of the wondering
Title:  whispering among the men; till Stubb cautiously whispered to Flask,
Title:  that Ahab must have summoned them there for the purpose of witnessing
Title:  a pedestrian feat.  But this did not last long.  Vehemently pausing,
Title:  he cried:--
Title:  
Title:  "What do ye do when ye see a whale, men?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sing out for him!" was the impulsive rejoinder from a score of
Title:  clubbed voices.
Title:  
Title:  "Good!" cried Ahab, with a wild approval in his tones; observing the
Title:  hearty animation into which his unexpected question had so
Title:  magnetically thrown them.
Title:  
Title:  "And what do ye next, men?"
Title:  
Title:  "Lower away, and after him!"
Title:  
Title:  "And what tune is it ye pull to, men?"
Title:  
Title:  "A dead whale or a stove boat!"
Title:  
Title:  More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approving, grew the
Title:  countenance of the old man at every shout; while the mariners began
Title:  to gaze curiously at each other, as if marvelling how it was that
Title:  they themselves became so excited at such seemingly purposeless
Title:  questions.
Title:  
Title:  But, they were all eagerness again, as Ahab, now half-revolving in
Title:  his pivot-hole, with one hand reaching high up a shroud, and tightly,
Title:  almost convulsively grasping it, addressed them thus:--
Title:  
Title:  "All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about a
Title:  white whale.  Look ye! d'ye see this Spanish ounce of gold?"--holding
Title:  up a broad bright coin to the sun--"it is a sixteen dollar piece,
Title:  men.  D'ye see it?  Mr. Starbuck, hand me yon top-maul."
Title:  
Title:  While the mate was getting the hammer, Ahab, without speaking, was
Title:  slowly rubbing the gold piece against the skirts of his jacket, as if
Title:  to heighten its lustre, and without using any words was meanwhile
Title:  lowly humming to himself, producing a sound so strangely muffled and
Title:  inarticulate that it seemed the mechanical humming of the wheels of
Title:  his vitality in him.
Title:  
Title:  Receiving the top-maul from Starbuck, he advanced towards the
Title:  main-mast with the hammer uplifted in one hand, exhibiting the gold
Title:  with the other, and with a high raised voice exclaiming: "Whosoever
Title:  of ye raises me a white-headed whale with a wrinkled brow and a
Title:  crooked jaw; whosoever of ye raises me that white-headed whale, with
Title:  three holes punctured in his starboard fluke--look ye, whosoever of
Title:  ye raises me that same white whale, he shall have this gold ounce, my
Title:  boys!"
Title:  
Title:  "Huzza! huzza!" cried the seamen, as with swinging tarpaulins they
Title:  hailed the act of nailing the gold to the mast.
Title:  
Title:  "It's a white whale, I say," resumed Ahab, as he threw down the
Title:  topmaul: "a white whale.  Skin your eyes for him, men; look sharp for
Title:  white water; if ye see but a bubble, sing out."
Title:  
Title:  All this while Tashtego, Daggoo, and Queequeg had looked on with even
Title:  more intense interest and surprise than the rest, and at the mention
Title:  of the wrinkled brow and crooked jaw they had started as if each was
Title:  separately touched by some specific recollection.
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Ahab," said Tashtego, "that white whale must be the same
Title:  that some call Moby Dick."
Title:  
Title:  "Moby Dick?" shouted Ahab.  "Do ye know the white whale then, Tash?"
Title:  
Title:  "Does he fan-tail a little curious, sir, before he goes down?" said
Title:  the Gay-Header deliberately.
Title:  
Title:  "And has he a curious spout, too," said Daggoo, "very bushy, even for
Title:  a parmacetty, and mighty quick, Captain Ahab?"
Title:  
Title:  "And he have one, two, three--oh! good many iron in him hide, too,
Title:  Captain," cried Queequeg disjointedly, "all twiske-tee be-twisk, like
Title:  him--him--" faltering hard for a word, and screwing his hand round
Title:  and round as though uncorking a bottle--"like him--him--"
Title:  
Title:  "Corkscrew!" cried Ahab, "aye, Queequeg, the harpoons lie all twisted
Title:  and wrenched in him; aye, Daggoo, his spout is a big one, like a
Title:  whole shock of wheat, and white as a pile of our Nantucket wool after
Title:  the great annual sheep-shearing; aye, Tashtego, and he fan-tails like
Title:  a split jib in a squall.  Death and devils! men, it is Moby Dick ye
Title:  have seen--Moby Dick--Moby Dick!"
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Ahab," said Starbuck, who, with Stubb and Flask, had thus
Title:  far been eyeing his superior with increasing surprise, but at last
Title:  seemed struck with a thought which somewhat explained all the wonder.
Title:  "Captain Ahab, I have heard of Moby Dick--but it was not Moby Dick
Title:  that took off thy leg?"
Title:  
Title:  "Who told thee that?" cried Ahab; then pausing, "Aye, Starbuck; aye,
Title:  my hearties all round; it was Moby Dick that dismasted me; Moby Dick
Title:  that brought me to this dead stump I stand on now.  Aye, aye," he
Title:  shouted with a terrific, loud, animal sob, like that of a
Title:  heart-stricken moose; "Aye, aye! it was that accursed white whale
Title:  that razeed me; made a poor pegging lubber of me for ever and a day!"
Title:  Then tossing both arms, with measureless imprecations he shouted
Title:  out: "Aye, aye! and I'll chase him round Good Hope, and round the
Title:  Horn, and round the Norway Maelstrom, and round perdition's flames
Title:  before I give him up.  And this is what ye have shipped for, men! to
Title:  chase that white whale on both sides of land, and over all sides of
Title:  earth, till he spouts black blood and rolls fin out.  What say ye,
Title:  men, will ye splice hands on it, now?  I think ye do look brave."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye!" shouted the harpooneers and seamen, running closer to the
Title:  excited old man: "A sharp eye for the white whale; a sharp lance for
Title:  Moby Dick!"
Title:  
Title:  "God bless ye," he seemed to half sob and half shout.  "God bless ye,
Title:  men.  Steward! go draw the great measure of grog.  But what's this
Title:  long face about, Mr. Starbuck; wilt thou not chase the white whale?
Title:  art not game for Moby Dick?"
Title:  
Title:  "I am game for his crooked jaw, and for the jaws of Death too,
Title:  Captain Ahab, if it fairly comes in the way of the business we
Title:  follow; but I came here to hunt whales, not my commander's vengeance.
Title:  How many barrels will thy vengeance yield thee even if thou gettest
Title:  it, Captain Ahab? it will not fetch thee much in our Nantucket
Title:  market."
Title:  
Title:  "Nantucket market!  Hoot!  But come closer, Starbuck; thou requirest
Title:  a little lower layer.  If money's to be the measurer, man, and the
Title:  accountants have computed their great counting-house the globe, by
Title:  girdling it with guineas, one to every three parts of an inch; then,
Title:  let me tell thee, that my vengeance will fetch a great premium HERE!"
Title:  
Title:  "He smites his chest," whispered Stubb, "what's that for? methinks it
Title:  rings most vast, but hollow."
Title:  
Title:  "Vengeance on a dumb brute!" cried Starbuck, "that simply smote thee
Title:  from blindest instinct!  Madness!  To be enraged with a dumb thing,
Title:  Captain Ahab, seems blasphemous."
Title:  
Title:  "Hark ye yet again--the little lower layer.  All visible objects,
Title:  man, are but as pasteboard masks.  But in each event--in the living
Title:  act, the undoubted deed--there, some unknown but still reasoning
Title:  thing puts forth the mouldings of its features from behind the
Title:  unreasoning mask.  If man will strike, strike through the mask!  How
Title:  can the prisoner reach outside except by thrusting through the wall?
Title:  To me, the white whale is that wall, shoved near to me.  Sometimes I
Title:  think there's naught beyond.  But 'tis enough.  He tasks me; he heaps
Title:  me; I see in him outrageous strength, with an inscrutable malice
Title:  sinewing it.  That inscrutable thing is chiefly what I hate; and be
Title:  the white whale agent, or be the white whale principal, I will wreak
Title:  that hate upon him.  Talk not to me of blasphemy, man; I'd strike the
Title:  sun if it insulted me.  For could the sun do that, then could I do
Title:  the other; since there is ever a sort of fair play herein, jealousy
Title:  presiding over all creations.  But not my master, man, is even that
Title:  fair play.  Who's over me?  Truth hath no confines.  Take off thine
Title:  eye! more intolerable than fiends' glarings is a doltish stare!  So,
Title:  so; thou reddenest and palest; my heat has melted thee to anger-glow.
Title:  But look ye, Starbuck, what is said in heat, that thing unsays
Title:  itself.  There are men from whom warm words are small indignity.  I
Title:  meant not to incense thee.  Let it go.  Look! see yonder Turkish
Title:  cheeks of spotted tawn--living, breathing pictures painted by the
Title:  sun.  The Pagan leopards--the unrecking and unworshipping things,
Title:  that live; and seek, and give no reasons for the torrid life they
Title:  feel!  The crew, man, the crew!  Are they not one and all with Ahab,
Title:  in this matter of the whale?  See Stubb! he laughs!  See yonder
Title:  Chilian! he snorts to think of it.  Stand up amid the general
Title:  hurricane, thy one tost sapling cannot, Starbuck!  And what is it?
Title:  Reckon it.  'Tis but to help strike a fin; no wondrous feat for
Title:  Starbuck.  What is it more?  From this one poor hunt, then, the best
Title:  lance out of all Nantucket, surely he will not hang back, when every
Title:  foremast-hand has clutched a whetstone?  Ah! constrainings seize
Title:  thee; I see! the billow lifts thee!  Speak, but speak!--Aye, aye! thy
Title:  silence, then, THAT voices thee.  (ASIDE) Something shot from my
Title:  dilated nostrils, he has inhaled it in his lungs.  Starbuck now is
Title:  mine; cannot oppose me now, without rebellion."
Title:  
Title:  "God keep me!--keep us all!" murmured Starbuck, lowly.
Title:  
Title:  But in his joy at the enchanted, tacit acquiescence of the mate, Ahab
Title:  did not hear his foreboding invocation; nor yet the low laugh from
Title:  the hold; nor yet the presaging vibrations of the winds in the
Title:  cordage; nor yet the hollow flap of the sails against the masts, as
Title:  for a moment their hearts sank in.  For again Starbuck's downcast
Title:  eyes lighted up with the stubbornness of life; the subterranean laugh
Title:  died away; the winds blew on; the sails filled out; the ship heaved
Title:  and rolled as before.  Ah, ye admonitions and warnings! why stay ye
Title:  not when ye come?  But rather are ye predictions than warnings, ye
Title:  shadows!  Yet not so much predictions from without, as verifications
Title:  of the foregoing things within.  For with little external to
Title:  constrain us, the innermost necessities in our being, these still
Title:  drive us on.
Title:  
Title:  "The measure! the measure!" cried Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  Receiving the brimming pewter, and turning to the harpooneers, he
Title:  ordered them to produce their weapons.  Then ranging them before him
Title:  near the capstan, with their harpoons in their hands, while his three
Title:  mates stood at his side with their lances, and the rest of the ship's
Title:  company formed a circle round the group; he stood for an instant
Title:  searchingly eyeing every man of his crew.  But those wild eyes met
Title:  his, as the bloodshot eyes of the prairie wolves meet the eye of
Title:  their leader, ere he rushes on at their head in the trail of the
Title:  bison; but, alas! only to fall into the hidden snare of the Indian.
Title:  
Title:  "Drink and pass!" he cried, handing the heavy charged flagon to the
Title:  nearest seaman.  "The crew alone now drink.  Round with it, round!
Title:  Short draughts--long swallows, men; 'tis hot as Satan's hoof.  So,
Title:  so; it goes round excellently.  It spiralizes in ye; forks out at the
Title:  serpent-snapping eye.  Well done; almost drained.  That way it went,
Title:  this way it comes.  Hand it me--here's a hollow!  Men, ye seem the
Title:  years; so brimming life is gulped and gone.  Steward, refill!
Title:  
Title:  "Attend now, my braves.  I have mustered ye all round this capstan;
Title:  and ye mates, flank me with your lances; and ye harpooneers, stand
Title:  there with your irons; and ye, stout mariners, ring me in, that I may
Title:  in some sort revive a noble custom of my fisherman fathers before
Title:  me.  O men, you will yet see that--Ha! boy, come back? bad pennies
Title:  come not sooner.  Hand it me.  Why, now, this pewter had run brimming
Title:  again, were't not thou St. Vitus' imp--away, thou ague!
Title:  
Title:  "Advance, ye mates!  Cross your lances full before me.  Well done!
Title:  Let me touch the axis."  So saying, with extended arm, he grasped the
Title:  three level, radiating lances at their crossed centre; while so
Title:  doing, suddenly and nervously twitched them; meanwhile, glancing
Title:  intently from Starbuck to Stubb; from Stubb to Flask.  It seemed as
Title:  though, by some nameless, interior volition, he would fain have
Title:  shocked into them the same fiery emotion accumulated within the
Title:  Leyden jar of his own magnetic life.  The three mates quailed before
Title:  his strong, sustained, and mystic aspect.  Stubb and Flask looked
Title:  sideways from him; the honest eye of Starbuck fell downright.
Title:  
Title:  "In vain!" cried Ahab; "but, maybe, 'tis well.  For did ye three but
Title:  once take the full-forced shock, then mine own electric thing, THAT
Title:  had perhaps expired from out me.  Perchance, too, it would have
Title:  dropped ye dead.  Perchance ye need it not.  Down lances!  And now,
Title:  ye mates, I do appoint ye three cupbearers to my three pagan kinsmen
Title:  there--yon three most honourable gentlemen and noblemen, my valiant
Title:  harpooneers.  Disdain the task?  What, when the great Pope washes the
Title:  feet of beggars, using his tiara for ewer?  Oh, my sweet cardinals!
Title:  your own condescension, THAT shall bend ye to it.  I do not order ye;
Title:  ye will it.  Cut your seizings and draw the poles, ye harpooneers!"
Title:  
Title:  Silently obeying the order, the three harpooneers now stood with the
Title:  detached iron part of their harpoons, some three feet long, held,
Title:  barbs up, before him.
Title:  
Title:  "Stab me not with that keen steel!  Cant them; cant them over! know
Title:  ye not the goblet end?  Turn up the socket!  So, so; now, ye
Title:  cup-bearers, advance.  The irons! take them; hold them while I fill!"
Title:  Forthwith, slowly going from one officer to the other, he brimmed
Title:  the harpoon sockets with the fiery waters from the pewter.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, three to three, ye stand.  Commend the murderous chalices!
Title:  Bestow them, ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble league.
Title:  Ha!  Starbuck! but the deed is done!  Yon ratifying sun now waits to
Title:  sit upon it.  Drink, ye harpooneers! drink and swear, ye men that man
Title:  the deathful whaleboat's bow--Death to Moby Dick!  God hunt us all,
Title:  if we do not hunt Moby Dick to his death!"  The long, barbed steel
Title:  goblets were lifted; and to cries and maledictions against the white
Title:  whale, the spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss.
Title:  Starbuck paled, and turned, and shivered.  Once more, and finally,
Title:  the replenished pewter went the rounds among the frantic crew; when,
Title:  waving his free hand to them, they all dispersed; and Ahab retired
Title:  within his cabin.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 37
Title:  
Title:  Sunset.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  THE CABIN; BY THE STERN WINDOWS; AHAB SITTING ALONE, AND GAZING OUT.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I leave a white and turbid wake; pale waters, paler cheeks, where'er
Title:  I sail.  The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track; let
Title:  them; but first I pass.
Title:  
Title:  Yonder, by ever-brimming goblet's rim, the warm waves blush like
Title:  wine.  The gold brow plumbs the blue.  The diver sun--slow dived from
Title:  noon--goes down; my soul mounts up! she wearies with her endless
Title:  hill.  Is, then, the crown too heavy that I wear? this Iron Crown of
Title:  Lombardy.  Yet is it bright with many a gem; I the wearer, see not
Title:  its far flashings; but darkly feel that I wear that, that dazzlingly
Title:  confounds.  'Tis iron--that I know--not gold.  'Tis split, too--that
Title:  I feel; the jagged edge galls me so, my brain seems to beat against
Title:  the solid metal; aye, steel skull, mine; the sort that needs no
Title:  helmet in the most brain-battering fight!
Title:  
Title:  Dry heat upon my brow?  Oh! time was, when as the sunrise nobly
Title:  spurred me, so the sunset soothed.  No more.  This lovely light, it
Title:  lights not me; all loveliness is anguish to me, since I can ne'er
Title:  enjoy.  Gifted with the high perception, I lack the low, enjoying
Title:  power; damned, most subtly and most malignantly! damned in the midst
Title:  of Paradise!  Good night--good night! (WAVING HIS HAND, HE MOVES FROM
Title:  THE WINDOW.)
Title:  
Title:  'Twas not so hard a task.  I thought to find one stubborn, at the
Title:  least; but my one cogged circle fits into all their various wheels,
Title:  and they revolve.  Or, if you will, like so many ant-hills of powder,
Title:  they all stand before me; and I their match.  Oh, hard! that to fire
Title:  others, the match itself must needs be wasting!  What I've dared,
Title:  I've willed; and what I've willed, I'll do!  They think me
Title:  mad--Starbuck does; but I'm demoniac, I am madness maddened!  That
Title:  wild madness that's only calm to comprehend itself!  The prophecy was
Title:  that I should be dismembered; and--Aye!  I lost this leg.  I now
Title:  prophesy that I will dismember my dismemberer.  Now, then, be the
Title:  prophet and the fulfiller one.  That's more than ye, ye great gods,
Title:  ever were.  I laugh and hoot at ye, ye cricket-players, ye pugilists,
Title:  ye deaf Burkes and blinded Bendigoes!  I will not say as schoolboys
Title:  do to bullies--Take some one of your own size; don't pommel ME!  No,
Title:  ye've knocked me down, and I am up again; but YE have run and hidden.
Title:  Come forth from behind your cotton bags!  I have no long gun to
Title:  reach ye.  Come, Ahab's compliments to ye; come and see if ye can
Title:  swerve me.  Swerve me? ye cannot swerve me, else ye swerve
Title:  yourselves! man has ye there.  Swerve me?  The path to my fixed
Title:  purpose is laid with iron rails, whereon my soul is grooved to run.
Title:  Over unsounded gorges, through the rifled hearts of mountains, under
Title:  torrents' beds, unerringly I rush!  Naught's an obstacle, naught's an
Title:  angle to the iron way!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 38
Title:  
Title:  Dusk.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  BY THE MAINMAST; STARBUCK LEANING AGAINST IT.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  My soul is more than matched; she's overmanned; and by a madman!
Title:  Insufferable sting, that sanity should ground arms on such a field!
Title:  But he drilled deep down, and blasted all my reason out of me!  I
Title:  think I see his impious end; but feel that I must help him to it.
Title:  Will I, nill I, the ineffable thing has tied me to him; tows me with
Title:  a cable I have no knife to cut.  Horrible old man!  Who's over him,
Title:  he cries;--aye, he would be a democrat to all above; look, how he
Title:  lords it over all below!  Oh!  I plainly see my miserable office,--to
Title:  obey, rebelling; and worse yet, to hate with touch of pity!  For in
Title:  his eyes I read some lurid woe would shrivel me up, had I it.  Yet is
Title:  there hope.  Time and tide flow wide.  The hated whale has the round
Title:  watery world to swim in, as the small gold-fish has its glassy globe.
Title:  His heaven-insulting purpose, God may wedge aside.  I would up
Title:  heart, were it not like lead.  But my whole clock's run down; my
Title:  heart the all-controlling weight, I have no key to lift again.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  [A BURST OF REVELRY FROM THE FORECASTLE.]
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Oh, God! to sail with such a heathen crew that have small touch of
Title:  human mothers in them!  Whelped somewhere by the sharkish sea.  The
Title:  white whale is their demigorgon.  Hark! the infernal orgies! that
Title:  revelry is forward! mark the unfaltering silence aft!  Methinks it
Title:  pictures life.  Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on the gay,
Title:  embattled, bantering bow, but only to drag dark Ahab after it, where
Title:  he broods within his sternward cabin, builded over the dead water of
Title:  the wake, and further on, hunted by its wolfish gurglings.  The long
Title:  howl thrills me through!  Peace! ye revellers, and set the watch!
Title:  Oh, life!  'tis in an hour like this, with soul beat down and held to
Title:  knowledge,--as wild, untutored things are forced to feed--Oh, life!
Title:  'tis now that I do feel the latent horror in thee! but 'tis not me!
Title:  that horror's out of me! and with the soft feeling of the human in
Title:  me, yet will I try to fight ye, ye grim, phantom futures!  Stand by
Title:  me, hold me, bind me, O ye blessed influences!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 39
Title:  
Title:  First Night Watch.
Title:  
Title:  Fore-Top.
Title:  
Title:  (STUBB SOLUS, AND MENDING A BRACE.)
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Ha! ha! ha! ha! hem! clear my throat!--I've been thinking over it
Title:  ever since, and that ha, ha's the final consequence.  Why so?
Title:  Because a laugh's the wisest, easiest answer to all that's queer; and
Title:  come what will, one comfort's always left--that unfailing comfort is,
Title:  it's all predestinated.  I heard not all his talk with Starbuck; but
Title:  to my poor eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening
Title:  felt.  Be sure the old Mogul has fixed him, too.  I twigged it, knew
Title:  it; had had the gift, might readily have prophesied it--for when I
Title:  clapped my eye upon his skull I saw it.  Well, Stubb, WISE
Title:  Stubb--that's my title--well, Stubb, what of it, Stubb?  Here's a
Title:  carcase.  I know not all that may be coming, but be it what it will,
Title:  I'll go to it laughing.  Such a waggish leering as lurks in all your
Title:  horribles!  I feel funny.  Fa, la! lirra, skirra!  What's my juicy
Title:  little pear at home doing now?  Crying its eyes out?--Giving a party
Title:  to the last arrived harpooneers, I dare say, gay as a frigate's
Title:  pennant, and so am I--fa, la! lirra, skirra!  Oh--
Title:  
Title:  We'll drink to-night with hearts as light,
Title:  To love, as gay and fleeting
Title:  As bubbles that swim, on the beaker's brim,
Title:  And break on the lips while meeting.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  A brave stave that--who calls?  Mr. Starbuck?  Aye, aye, sir--(ASIDE)
Title:  he's my superior, he has his too, if I'm not mistaken.--Aye, aye,
Title:  sir, just through with this job--coming.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 40
Title:  
Title:  Midnight, Forecastle.
Title:  
Title:  HARPOONEERS AND SAILORS.
Title:  
Title:  (FORESAIL RISES AND DISCOVERS THE WATCH STANDING, LOUNGING, LEANING,
Title:  AND LYING IN VARIOUS ATTITUDES, ALL SINGING IN CHORUS.)
Title:  
Title:  Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies!
Title:  Farewell and adieu to you, ladies of Spain!
Title:  Our captain's commanded.--
Title:  
Title:  1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Title:  Oh, boys, don't be sentimental; it's bad for the digestion!  Take a
Title:  tonic, follow me!
Title:  (SINGS, AND ALL FOLLOW)
Title:  
Title:  Our captain stood upon the deck,
Title:  A spy-glass in his hand,
Title:  A viewing of those gallant whales
Title:  That blew at every strand.
Title:  Oh, your tubs in your boats, my boys,
Title:  And by your braces stand,
Title:  And we'll have one of those fine whales,
Title:  Hand, boys, over hand!
Title:  So, be cheery, my lads! may your hearts never fail!
Title:  While the bold harpooner is striking the whale!
Title:  
Title:  MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK.
Title:  Eight bells there, forward!
Title:  
Title:  2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Title:  Avast the chorus!  Eight bells there! d'ye hear, bell-boy?  Strike
Title:  the bell eight, thou Pip! thou blackling! and let me call the watch.
Title:  I've the sort of mouth for that--the hogshead mouth.  So, so,
Title:  (THRUSTS HIS HEAD DOWN THE SCUTTLE,) Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s, a-h-o-y!
Title:  Eight bells there below!  Tumble up!
Title:  
Title:  DUTCH SAILOR.
Title:  Grand snoozing to-night, maty; fat night for that.  I mark this in
Title:  our old Mogul's wine; it's quite as deadening to some as filliping to
Title:  others.  We sing; they sleep--aye, lie down there, like ground-tier
Title:  butts.  At 'em again!  There, take this copper-pump, and hail 'em
Title:  through it.  Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lasses.  Tell 'em
Title:  it's the resurrection; they must kiss their last, and come to
Title:  judgment.  That's the way--THAT'S it; thy throat ain't spoiled with
Title:  eating Amsterdam butter.
Title:  
Title:  FRENCH SAILOR.
Title:  Hist, boys! let's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor in
Title:  Blanket Bay.  What say ye?  There comes the other watch.  Stand by
Title:  all legs!  Pip! little Pip! hurrah with your tambourine!
Title:  
Title:  PIP.
Title:  (SULKY AND SLEEPY)
Title:  Don't know where it is.
Title:  
Title:  FRENCH SAILOR.
Title:  Beat thy belly, then, and wag thy ears.  Jig it, men, I say; merry's
Title:  the word; hurrah!  Damn me, won't you dance?  Form, now, Indian-file,
Title:  and gallop into the double-shuffle?  Throw yourselves!  Legs! legs!
Title:  
Title:  ICELAND SAILOR.
Title:  I don't like your floor, maty; it's too springy to my taste.  I'm
Title:  used to ice-floors.  I'm sorry to throw cold water on the subject;
Title:  but excuse me.
Title:  
Title:  MALTESE SAILOR.
Title:  Me too; where's your girls?  Who but a fool would take his left hand
Title:  by his right, and say to himself, how d'ye do?  Partners!  I must
Title:  have partners!
Title:  
Title:  SICILIAN SAILOR.
Title:  Aye; girls and a green!--then I'll hop with ye; yea, turn
Title:  grasshopper!
Title:  
Title:  LONG-ISLAND SAILOR.
Title:  Well, well, ye sulkies, there's plenty more of us.  Hoe corn when you
Title:  may, say I.  All legs go to harvest soon.  Ah! here comes the music;
Title:  now for it!
Title:  
Title:  AZORE SAILOR.
Title:  (ASCENDING, AND PITCHING THE TAMBOURINE UP THE SCUTTLE.)
Title:  Here you are, Pip; and there's the windlass-bitts; up you mount!
Title:  Now, boys!
Title:  (THE HALF OF THEM DANCE TO THE TAMBOURINE; SOME GO BELOW; SOME SLEEP
Title:  OR LIE AMONG THE COILS OF RIGGING.  OATHS A-PLENTY.)
Title:  
Title:  AZORE SAILOR.
Title:  (DANCING)
Title:  Go it, Pip!  Bang it, bell-boy!  Rig it, dig it, stig it, quig it,
Title:  bell-boy!  Make fire-flies; break the jinglers!
Title:  
Title:  PIP.
Title:  Jinglers, you say?--there goes another, dropped off; I pound it so.
Title:  
Title:  CHINA SAILOR.
Title:  Rattle thy teeth, then, and pound away; make a pagoda of thyself.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  FRENCH SAILOR.
Title:  Merry-mad!  Hold up thy hoop, Pip, till I jump through it!  Split
Title:  jibs! tear yourselves!
Title:  
Title:  TASHTEGO.
Title:  (QUIETLY SMOKING)
Title:  That's a white man; he calls that fun: humph!  I save my sweat.
Title:  
Title:  OLD MANX SAILOR.
Title:  I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are
Title:  dancing over.  I'll dance over your grave, I will--that's the
Title:  bitterest threat of your night-women, that beat head-winds round
Title:  corners.  O Christ! to think of the green navies and the
Title:  green-skulled crews!  Well, well; belike the whole world's a ball, as
Title:  you scholars have it; and so 'tis right to make one ballroom of it.
Title:  Dance on, lads, you're young; I was once.
Title:  
Title:  3D NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Title:  Spell oh!--whew! this is worse than pulling after whales in a
Title:  calm--give us a whiff, Tash.
Title:  
Title:  (THEY CEASE DANCING, AND GATHER IN CLUSTERS.  MEANTIME THE SKY
Title:  DARKENS--THE WIND RISES.)
Title:  
Title:  LASCAR SAILOR.
Title:  By Brahma! boys, it'll be douse sail soon.  The sky-born, high-tide
Title:  Ganges turned to wind!  Thou showest thy black brow, Seeva!
Title:  
Title:  MALTESE SAILOR.
Title:  (RECLINING AND SHAKING HIS CAP.)
Title:  It's the waves--the snow's caps turn to jig it now.  They'll shake
Title:  their tassels soon.  Now would all the waves were women, then I'd go
Title:  drown, and chassee with them evermore!  There's naught so sweet on
Title:  earth--heaven may not match it!--as those swift glances of warm, wild
Title:  bosoms in the dance, when the over-arboring arms hide such ripe,
Title:  bursting grapes.
Title:  
Title:  SICILIAN SAILOR.
Title:  (RECLINING.)
Title:  Tell me not of it!  Hark ye, lad--fleet interlacings of the
Title:  limbs--lithe swayings--coyings--flutterings! lip! heart! hip! all
Title:  graze: unceasing touch and go! not taste, observe ye, else come
Title:  satiety.  Eh, Pagan? (NUDGING.)
Title:  
Title:  TAHITAN SAILOR.
Title:  (RECLINING ON A MAT.)
Title:  Hail, holy nakedness of our dancing girls!--the Heeva-Heeva!  Ah! low
Title:  veiled, high palmed Tahiti!  I still rest me on thy mat, but the soft
Title:  soil has slid!  I saw thee woven in the wood, my mat! green the first
Title:  day I brought ye thence; now worn and wilted quite.  Ah me!--not thou
Title:  nor I can bear the change!  How then, if so be transplanted to yon
Title:  sky?  Hear I the roaring streams from Pirohitee's peak of spears,
Title:  when they leap down the crags and drown the villages?--The blast! the
Title:  blast!  Up, spine, and meet it! (LEAPS TO HIS FEET.)
Title:  
Title:  PORTUGUESE SAILOR.
Title:  How the sea rolls swashing 'gainst the side!  Stand by for reefing,
Title:  hearties! the winds are just crossing swords, pell-mell they'll go
Title:  lunging presently.
Title:  
Title:  DANISH SAILOR.
Title:  Crack, crack, old ship! so long as thou crackest, thou holdest!  Well
Title:  done!  The mate there holds ye to it stiffly.  He's no more afraid
Title:  than the isle fort at Cattegat, put there to fight the Baltic with
Title:  storm-lashed guns, on which the sea-salt cakes!
Title:  
Title:  4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Title:  He has his orders, mind ye that.  I heard old Ahab tell him he must
Title:  always kill a squall, something as they burst a waterspout with a
Title:  pistol--fire your ship right into it!
Title:  
Title:  ENGLISH SAILOR.
Title:  Blood! but that old man's a grand old cove!  We are the lads to hunt
Title:  him up his whale!
Title:  
Title:  ALL.
Title:  Aye! aye!
Title:  
Title:  OLD MANX SAILOR.
Title:  How the three pines shake!  Pines are the hardest sort of tree to
Title:  live when shifted to any other soil, and here there's none but the
Title:  crew's cursed clay.  Steady, helmsman! steady.  This is the sort of
Title:  weather when brave hearts snap ashore, and keeled hulls split at sea.
Title:  Our captain has his birthmark; look yonder, boys, there's another in
Title:  the sky--lurid-like, ye see, all else pitch black.
Title:  
Title:  DAGGOO.
Title:  What of that?  Who's afraid of black's afraid of me!  I'm quarried
Title:  out of it!
Title:  
Title:  SPANISH SAILOR.
Title:  (ASIDE.) He wants to bully, ah!--the old grudge makes me touchy
Title:  (ADVANCING.) Aye, harpooneer, thy race is the undeniable dark side of
Title:  mankind--devilish dark at that.  No offence.
Title:  
Title:  DAGGOO (GRIMLY).
Title:  None.
Title:  
Title:  ST. JAGO'S SAILOR.
Title:  That Spaniard's mad or drunk.  But that can't be, or else in his one
Title:  case our old Mogul's fire-waters are somewhat long in working.
Title:  
Title:  5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR.
Title:  What's that I saw--lightning?  Yes.
Title:  
Title:  SPANISH SAILOR.
Title:  No; Daggoo showing his teeth.
Title:  
Title:  DAGGOO (SPRINGING).
Title:  Swallow thine, mannikin!  White skin, white liver!
Title:  
Title:  SPANISH SAILOR (MEETING HIM).
Title:  Knife thee heartily! big frame, small spirit!
Title:  
Title:  ALL.
Title:  A row! a row! a row!
Title:  
Title:  TASHTEGO (WITH A WHIFF).
Title:  A row a'low, and a row aloft--Gods and men--both brawlers!  Humph!
Title:  
Title:  BELFAST SAILOR.
Title:  A row! arrah a row!  The Virgin be blessed, a row!  Plunge in with
Title:  ye!
Title:  
Title:  ENGLISH SAILOR.
Title:  Fair play!  Snatch the Spaniard's knife!  A ring, a ring!
Title:  
Title:  OLD MANX SAILOR.
Title:  Ready formed.  There! the ringed horizon.  In that ring Cain struck
Title:  Abel.  Sweet work, right work!  No?  Why then, God, mad'st thou the
Title:  ring?
Title:  
Title:  MATE'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK.
Title:  Hands by the halyards! in top-gallant sails!  Stand by to reef
Title:  topsails!
Title:  
Title:  ALL.
Title:  The squall! the squall! jump, my jollies! (THEY SCATTER.)
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  PIP (SHRINKING UNDER THE WINDLASS).
Title:  Jollies?  Lord help such jollies!  Crish, crash! there goes the
Title:  jib-stay!  Blang-whang!  God!  Duck lower, Pip, here comes the royal
Title:  yard!  It's worse than being in the whirled woods, the last day of
Title:  the year!  Who'd go climbing after chestnuts now?  But there they
Title:  go, all cursing, and here I don't.  Fine prospects to 'em; they're on
Title:  the road to heaven.  Hold on hard!  Jimmini, what a squall!  But
Title:  those chaps there are worse yet--they are your white squalls, they.
Title:  White squalls? white whale, shirr! shirr!  Here have I heard all
Title:  their chat just now, and the white whale--shirr! shirr!--but spoken
Title:  of once! and only this evening--it makes me jingle all over like my
Title:  tambourine--that anaconda of an old man swore 'em in to hunt him!
Title:  Oh, thou big white God aloft there somewhere in yon darkness, have
Title:  mercy on this small black boy down here; preserve him from all men
Title:  that have no bowels to feel fear!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 41
Title:  
Title:  Moby Dick.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I, Ishmael, was one of that crew; my shouts had gone up with the
Title:  rest; my oath had been welded with theirs; and stronger I shouted,
Title:  and more did I hammer and clinch my oath, because of the dread in my
Title:  soul.  A wild, mystical, sympathetical feeling was in me; Ahab's
Title:  quenchless feud seemed mine.  With greedy ears I learned the history
Title:  of that murderous monster against whom I and all the others had taken
Title:  our oaths of violence and revenge.
Title:  
Title:  For some time past, though at intervals only, the unaccompanied,
Title:  secluded White Whale had haunted those uncivilized seas mostly
Title:  frequented by the Sperm Whale fishermen.  But not all of them knew of
Title:  his existence; only a few of them, comparatively, had knowingly seen
Title:  him; while the number who as yet had actually and knowingly given
Title:  battle to him, was small indeed.  For, owing to the large number of
Title:  whale-cruisers; the disorderly way they were sprinkled over the
Title:  entire watery circumference, many of them adventurously pushing their
Title:  quest along solitary latitudes, so as seldom or never for a whole
Title:  twelvemonth or more on a stretch, to encounter a single news-telling
Title:  sail of any sort; the inordinate length of each separate voyage; the
Title:  irregularity of the times of sailing from home; all these, with other
Title:  circumstances, direct and indirect, long obstructed the spread
Title:  through the whole world-wide whaling-fleet of the special
Title:  individualizing tidings concerning Moby Dick.  It was hardly to be
Title:  doubted, that several vessels reported to have encountered, at such
Title:  or such a time, or on such or such a meridian, a Sperm Whale of
Title:  uncommon magnitude and malignity, which whale, after doing great
Title:  mischief to his assailants, had completely escaped them; to some
Title:  minds it was not an unfair presumption, I say, that the whale in
Title:  question must have been no other than Moby Dick.  Yet as of late the
Title:  Sperm Whale fishery had been marked by various and not unfrequent
Title:  instances of great ferocity, cunning, and malice in the monster
Title:  attacked; therefore it was, that those who by accident ignorantly
Title:  gave battle to Moby Dick; such hunters, perhaps, for the most part,
Title:  were content to ascribe the peculiar terror he bred, more, as it
Title:  were, to the perils of the Sperm Whale fishery at large, than to the
Title:  individual cause.  In that way, mostly, the disastrous encounter
Title:  between Ahab and the whale had hitherto been popularly regarded.
Title:  
Title:  And as for those who, previously hearing of the White Whale, by
Title:  chance caught sight of him; in the beginning of the thing they had
Title:  every one of them, almost, as boldly and fearlessly lowered for him,
Title:  as for any other whale of that species.  But at length, such
Title:  calamities did ensue in these assaults--not restricted to sprained
Title:  wrists and ankles, broken limbs, or devouring amputations--but fatal
Title:  to the last degree of fatality; those repeated disastrous repulses,
Title:  all accumulating and piling their terrors upon Moby Dick; those
Title:  things had gone far to shake the fortitude of many brave hunters, to
Title:  whom the story of the White Whale had eventually come.
Title:  
Title:  Nor did wild rumors of all sorts fail to exaggerate, and still the
Title:  more horrify the true histories of these deadly encounters.  For not
Title:  only do fabulous rumors naturally grow out of the very body of all
Title:  surprising terrible events,--as the smitten tree gives birth to its
Title:  fungi; but, in maritime life, far more than in that of terra firma,
Title:  wild rumors abound, wherever there is any adequate reality for them
Title:  to cling to.  And as the sea surpasses the land in this matter, so
Title:  the whale fishery surpasses every other sort of maritime life, in the
Title:  wonderfulness and fearfulness of the rumors which sometimes circulate
Title:  there.  For not only are whalemen as a body unexempt from that
Title:  ignorance and superstitiousness hereditary to all sailors; but of all
Title:  sailors, they are by all odds the most directly brought into contact
Title:  with whatever is appallingly astonishing in the sea; face to face
Title:  they not only eye its greatest marvels, but, hand to jaw, give battle
Title:  to them.  Alone, in such remotest waters, that though you sailed a
Title:  thousand miles, and passed a thousand shores, you would not come to
Title:  any chiseled hearth-stone, or aught hospitable beneath that part of
Title:  the sun; in such latitudes and longitudes, pursuing too such a
Title:  calling as he does, the whaleman is wrapped by influences all tending
Title:  to make his fancy pregnant with many a mighty birth.
Title:  
Title:  No wonder, then, that ever gathering volume from the mere transit
Title:  over the widest watery spaces, the outblown rumors of the White Whale
Title:  did in the end incorporate with themselves all manner of morbid
Title:  hints, and half-formed foetal suggestions of supernatural agencies,
Title:  which eventually invested Moby Dick with new terrors unborrowed from
Title:  anything that visibly appears.  So that in many cases such a panic
Title:  did he finally strike, that few who by those rumors, at least, had
Title:  heard of the White Whale, few of those hunters were willing to
Title:  encounter the perils of his jaw.
Title:  
Title:  But there were still other and more vital practical influences at
Title:  work.  Not even at the present day has the original prestige of the
Title:  Sperm Whale, as fearfully distinguished from all other species of the
Title:  leviathan, died out of the minds of the whalemen as a body.  There
Title:  are those this day among them, who, though intelligent and courageous
Title:  enough in offering battle to the Greenland or Right whale, would
Title:  perhaps--either from professional inexperience, or incompetency, or
Title:  timidity, decline a contest with the Sperm Whale; at any rate, there
Title:  are plenty of whalemen, especially among those whaling nations not
Title:  sailing under the American flag, who have never hostilely encountered
Title:  the Sperm Whale, but whose sole knowledge of the leviathan is
Title:  restricted to the ignoble monster primitively pursued in the North;
Title:  seated on their hatches, these men will hearken with a childish
Title:  fireside interest and awe, to the wild, strange tales of Southern
Title:  whaling.  Nor is the pre-eminent tremendousness of the great Sperm
Title:  Whale anywhere more feelingly comprehended, than on board of those
Title:  prows which stem him.
Title:  
Title:  And as if the now tested reality of his might had in former legendary
Title:  times thrown its shadow before it; we find some book
Title:  naturalists--Olassen and Povelson--declaring the Sperm Whale not only
Title:  to be a consternation to every other creature in the sea, but also to
Title:  be so incredibly ferocious as continually to be athirst for human
Title:  blood.  Nor even down to so late a time as Cuvier's, were these or
Title:  almost similar impressions effaced.  For in his Natural History, the
Title:  Baron himself affirms that at sight of the Sperm Whale, all fish
Title:  (sharks included) are "struck with the most lively terrors," and
Title:  "often in the precipitancy of their flight dash themselves against
Title:  the rocks with such violence as to cause instantaneous death."  And
Title:  however the general experiences in the fishery may amend such reports
Title:  as these; yet in their full terribleness, even to the bloodthirsty
Title:  item of Povelson, the superstitious belief in them is, in some
Title:  vicissitudes of their vocation, revived in the minds of the hunters.
Title:  
Title:  So that overawed by the rumors and portents concerning him, not a few
Title:  of the fishermen recalled, in reference to Moby Dick, the earlier
Title:  days of the Sperm Whale fishery, when it was oftentimes hard to
Title:  induce long practised Right whalemen to embark in the perils of this
Title:  new and daring warfare; such men protesting that although other
Title:  leviathans might be hopefully pursued, yet to chase and point lance
Title:  at such an apparition as the Sperm Whale was not for mortal man.
Title:  That to attempt it, would be inevitably to be torn into a quick
Title:  eternity.  On this head, there are some remarkable documents that may
Title:  be consulted.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, some there were, who even in the face of these things
Title:  were ready to give chase to Moby Dick; and a still greater number
Title:  who, chancing only to hear of him distantly and vaguely, without the
Title:  specific details of any certain calamity, and without superstitious
Title:  accompaniments, were sufficiently hardy not to flee from the battle
Title:  if offered.
Title:  
Title:  One of the wild suggestions referred to, as at last coming to be
Title:  linked with the White Whale in the minds of the superstitiously
Title:  inclined, was the unearthly conceit that Moby Dick was ubiquitous;
Title:  that he had actually been encountered in opposite latitudes at one
Title:  and the same instant of time.
Title:  
Title:  Nor, credulous as such minds must have been, was this conceit
Title:  altogether without some faint show of superstitious probability.  For
Title:  as the secrets of the currents in the seas have never yet been
Title:  divulged, even to the most erudite research; so the hidden ways of
Title:  the Sperm Whale when beneath the surface remain, in great part,
Title:  unaccountable to his pursuers; and from time to time have originated
Title:  the most curious and contradictory speculations regarding them,
Title:  especially concerning the mystic modes whereby, after sounding to a
Title:  great depth, he transports himself with such vast swiftness to the
Title:  most widely distant points.
Title:  
Title:  It is a thing well known to both American and English whale-ships,
Title:  and as well a thing placed upon authoritative record years ago by
Title:  Scoresby, that some whales have been captured far north in the
Title:  Pacific, in whose bodies have been found the barbs of harpoons darted
Title:  in the Greenland seas.  Nor is it to be gainsaid, that in some of
Title:  these instances it has been declared that the interval of time
Title:  between the two assaults could not have exceeded very many days.
Title:  Hence, by inference, it has been believed by some whalemen, that the
Title:  Nor' West Passage, so long a problem to man, was never a problem to
Title:  the whale.  So that here, in the real living experience of living
Title:  men, the prodigies related in old times of the inland Strello
Title:  mountain in Portugal (near whose top there was said to be a lake in
Title:  which the wrecks of ships floated up to the surface); and that still
Title:  more wonderful story of the Arethusa fountain near Syracuse (whose
Title:  waters were believed to have come from the Holy Land by an
Title:  underground passage); these fabulous narrations are almost fully
Title:  equalled by the realities of the whalemen.
Title:  
Title:  Forced into familiarity, then, with such prodigies as these; and
Title:  knowing that after repeated, intrepid assaults, the White Whale had
Title:  escaped alive; it cannot be much matter of surprise that some
Title:  whalemen should go still further in their superstitions; declaring
Title:  Moby Dick not only ubiquitous, but immortal (for immortality is but
Title:  ubiquity in time); that though groves of spears should be planted in
Title:  his flanks, he would still swim away unharmed; or if indeed he should
Title:  ever be made to spout thick blood, such a sight would be but a
Title:  ghastly deception; for again in unensanguined billows hundreds of
Title:  leagues away, his unsullied jet would once more be seen.
Title:  
Title:  But even stripped of these supernatural surmisings, there was enough
Title:  in the earthly make and incontestable character of the monster to
Title:  strike the imagination with unwonted power.  For, it was not so much
Title:  his uncommon bulk that so much distinguished him from other sperm
Title:  whales, but, as was elsewhere thrown out--a peculiar snow-white
Title:  wrinkled forehead, and a high, pyramidical white hump.  These were
Title:  his prominent features; the tokens whereby, even in the limitless,
Title:  uncharted seas, he revealed his identity, at a long distance, to
Title:  those who knew him.
Title:  
Title:  The rest of his body was so streaked, and spotted, and marbled with
Title:  the same shrouded hue, that, in the end, he had gained his
Title:  distinctive appellation of the White Whale; a name, indeed, literally
Title:  justified by his vivid aspect, when seen gliding at high noon through
Title:  a dark blue sea, leaving a milky-way wake of creamy foam, all
Title:  spangled with golden gleamings.
Title:  
Title:  Nor was it his unwonted magnitude, nor his remarkable hue, nor yet
Title:  his deformed lower jaw, that so much invested the whale with natural
Title:  terror, as that unexampled, intelligent malignity which, according to
Title:  specific accounts, he had over and over again evinced in his
Title:  assaults.  More than all, his treacherous retreats struck more of
Title:  dismay than perhaps aught else.  For, when swimming before his
Title:  exulting pursuers, with every apparent symptom of alarm, he had
Title:  several times been known to turn round suddenly, and, bearing down
Title:  upon them, either stave their boats to splinters, or drive them back
Title:  in consternation to their ship.
Title:  
Title:  Already several fatalities had attended his chase.  But though
Title:  similar disasters, however little bruited ashore, were by no means
Title:  unusual in the fishery; yet, in most instances, such seemed the White
Title:  Whale's infernal aforethought of ferocity, that every dismembering or
Title:  death that he caused, was not wholly regarded as having been
Title:  inflicted by an unintelligent agent.
Title:  
Title:  Judge, then, to what pitches of inflamed, distracted fury the minds
Title:  of his more desperate hunters were impelled, when amid the chips of
Title:  chewed boats, and the sinking limbs of torn comrades, they swam out
Title:  of the white curds of the whale's direful wrath into the serene,
Title:  exasperating sunlight, that smiled on, as if at a birth or a bridal.
Title:  
Title:  His three boats stove around him, and oars and men both whirling in
Title:  the eddies; one captain, seizing the line-knife from his broken prow,
Title:  had dashed at the whale, as an Arkansas duellist at his foe, blindly
Title:  seeking with a six inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of the
Title:  whale.  That captain was Ahab.  And then it was, that suddenly
Title:  sweeping his sickle-shaped lower jaw beneath him, Moby Dick had
Title:  reaped away Ahab's leg, as a mower a blade of grass in the field.  No
Title:  turbaned Turk, no hired Venetian or Malay, could have smote him with
Title:  more seeming malice.  Small reason was there to doubt, then, that
Title:  ever since that almost fatal encounter, Ahab had cherished a wild
Title:  vindictiveness against the whale, all the more fell for that in his
Title:  frantic morbidness he at last came to identify with him, not only all
Title:  his bodily woes, but all his intellectual and spiritual
Title:  exasperations.  The White Whale swam before him as the monomaniac
Title:  incarnation of all those malicious agencies which some deep men feel
Title:  eating in them, till they are left living on with half a heart and
Title:  half a lung.  That intangible malignity which has been from the
Title:  beginning; to whose dominion even the modern Christians ascribe
Title:  one-half of the worlds; which the ancient Ophites of the east
Title:  reverenced in their statue devil;--Ahab did not fall down and worship
Title:  it like them; but deliriously transferring its idea to the abhorred
Title:  white whale, he pitted himself, all mutilated, against it.  All that
Title:  most maddens and torments; all that stirs up the lees of things; all
Title:  truth with malice in it; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the
Title:  brain; all the subtle demonisms of life and thought; all evil, to
Title:  crazy Ahab, were visibly personified, and made practically assailable
Title:  in Moby Dick.  He piled upon the whale's white hump the sum of all
Title:  the general rage and hate felt by his whole race from Adam down; and
Title:  then, as if his chest had been a mortar, he burst his hot heart's
Title:  shell upon it.
Title:  
Title:  It is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant rise
Title:  at the precise time of his bodily dismemberment.  Then, in darting at
Title:  the monster, knife in hand, he had but given loose to a sudden,
Title:  passionate, corporal animosity; and when he received the stroke that
Title:  tore him, he probably but felt the agonizing bodily laceration, but
Title:  nothing more.  Yet, when by this collision forced to turn towards
Title:  home, and for long months of days and weeks, Ahab and anguish lay
Title:  stretched together in one hammock, rounding in mid winter that
Title:  dreary, howling Patagonian Cape; then it was, that his torn body and
Title:  gashed soul bled into one another; and so interfusing, made him mad.
Title:  That it was only then, on the homeward voyage, after the encounter,
Title:  that the final monomania seized him, seems all but certain from the
Title:  fact that, at intervals during the passage, he was a raving lunatic;
Title:  and, though unlimbed of a leg, yet such vital strength yet lurked in
Title:  his Egyptian chest, and was moreover intensified by his delirium,
Title:  that his mates were forced to lace him fast, even there, as he
Title:  sailed, raving in his hammock.  In a strait-jacket, he swung to the
Title:  mad rockings of the gales.  And, when running into more sufferable
Title:  latitudes, the ship, with mild stun'sails spread, floated across the
Title:  tranquil tropics, and, to all appearances, the old man's delirium
Title:  seemed left behind him with the Cape Horn swells, and he came forth
Title:  from his dark den into the blessed light and air; even then, when he
Title:  bore that firm, collected front, however pale, and issued his calm
Title:  orders once again; and his mates thanked God the direful madness was
Title:  now gone; even then, Ahab, in his hidden self, raved on.  Human
Title:  madness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline thing.  When you
Title:  think it fled, it may have but become transfigured into some still
Title:  subtler form.  Ahab's full lunacy subsided not, but deepeningly
Title:  contracted; like the unabated Hudson, when that noble Northman flows
Title:  narrowly, but unfathomably through the Highland gorge.  But, as in
Title:  his narrow-flowing monomania, not one jot of Ahab's broad madness had
Title:  been left behind; so in that broad madness, not one jot of his great
Title:  natural intellect had perished.  That before living agent, now became
Title:  the living instrument.  If such a furious trope may stand, his
Title:  special lunacy stormed his general sanity, and carried it, and turned
Title:  all its concentred cannon upon its own mad mark; so that far from
Title:  having lost his strength, Ahab, to that one end, did now possess a
Title:  thousand fold more potency than ever he had sanely brought to bear
Title:  upon any one reasonable object.
Title:  
Title:  This is much; yet Ahab's larger, darker, deeper part remains
Title:  unhinted.  But vain to popularize profundities, and all truth is
Title:  profound.  Winding far down from within the very heart of this spiked
Title:  Hotel de Cluny where we here stand--however grand and wonderful, now
Title:  quit it;--and take your way, ye nobler, sadder souls, to those vast
Title:  Roman halls of Thermes; where far beneath the fantastic towers of
Title:  man's upper earth, his root of grandeur, his whole awful essence sits
Title:  in bearded state; an antique buried beneath antiquities, and throned
Title:  on torsoes!  So with a broken throne, the great gods mock that
Title:  captive king; so like a Caryatid, he patient sits, upholding on his
Title:  frozen brow the piled entablatures of ages.  Wind ye down there, ye
Title:  prouder, sadder souls! question that proud, sad king!  A family
Title:  likeness! aye, he did beget ye, ye young exiled royalties; and from
Title:  your grim sire only will the old State-secret come.
Title:  
Title:  Now, in his heart, Ahab had some glimpse of this, namely: all my
Title:  means are sane, my motive and my object mad.  Yet without power to
Title:  kill, or change, or shun the fact; he likewise knew that to mankind
Title:  he did long dissemble; in some sort, did still.  But that thing of
Title:  his dissembling was only subject to his perceptibility, not to his
Title:  will determinate.  Nevertheless, so well did he succeed in that
Title:  dissembling, that when with ivory leg he stepped ashore at last, no
Title:  Nantucketer thought him otherwise than but naturally grieved, and
Title:  that to the quick, with the terrible casualty which had overtaken
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  The report of his undeniable delirium at sea was likewise popularly
Title:  ascribed to a kindred cause.  And so too, all the added moodiness
Title:  which always afterwards, to the very day of sailing in the Pequod on
Title:  the present voyage, sat brooding on his brow.  Nor is it so very
Title:  unlikely, that far from distrusting his fitness for another whaling
Title:  voyage, on account of such dark symptoms, the calculating people of
Title:  that prudent isle were inclined to harbor the conceit, that for those
Title:  very reasons he was all the better qualified and set on edge, for a
Title:  pursuit so full of rage and wildness as the bloody hunt of whales.
Title:  Gnawed within and scorched without, with the infixed, unrelenting
Title:  fangs of some incurable idea; such an one, could he be found, would
Title:  seem the very man to dart his iron and lift his lance against the
Title:  most appalling of all brutes.  Or, if for any reason thought to be
Title:  corporeally incapacitated for that, yet such an one would seem
Title:  superlatively competent to cheer and howl on his underlings to the
Title:  attack.  But be all this as it may, certain it is, that with the mad
Title:  secret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed in him, Ahab had
Title:  purposely sailed upon the present voyage with the one only and
Title:  all-engrossing object of hunting the White Whale.  Had any one of his
Title:  old acquaintances on shore but half dreamed of what was lurking in
Title:  him then, how soon would their aghast and righteous souls have
Title:  wrenched the ship from such a fiendish man!  They were bent on
Title:  profitable cruises, the profit to be counted down in dollars from the
Title:  mint.  He was intent on an audacious, immitigable, and supernatural
Title:  revenge.
Title:  
Title:  Here, then, was this grey-headed, ungodly old man, chasing with
Title:  curses a Job's whale round the world, at the head of a crew, too,
Title:  chiefly made up of mongrel renegades, and castaways, and
Title:  cannibals--morally enfeebled also, by the incompetence of mere
Title:  unaided virtue or right-mindedness in Starbuck, the invunerable
Title:  jollity of indifference and recklessness in Stubb, and the pervading
Title:  mediocrity in Flask.  Such a crew, so officered, seemed specially
Title:  picked and packed by some infernal fatality to help him to his
Title:  monomaniac revenge.  How it was that they so aboundingly responded to
Title:  the old man's ire--by what evil magic their souls were possessed,
Title:  that at times his hate seemed almost theirs; the White Whale as much
Title:  their insufferable foe as his; how all this came to be--what the
Title:  White Whale was to them, or how to their unconscious understandings,
Title:  also, in some dim, unsuspected way, he might have seemed the gliding
Title:  great demon of the seas of life,--all this to explain, would be to
Title:  dive deeper than Ishmael can go.  The subterranean miner that works
Title:  in us all, how can one tell whither leads his shaft by the ever
Title:  shifting, muffled sound of his pick?  Who does not feel the
Title:  irresistible arm drag?  What skiff in tow of a seventy-four can stand
Title:  still?  For one, I gave myself up to the abandonment of the time and
Title:  the place; but while yet all a-rush to encounter the whale, could see
Title:  naught in that brute but the deadliest ill.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 42
Title:  
Title:  The Whiteness of The Whale.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  What the white whale was to Ahab, has been hinted; what, at times, he
Title:  was to me, as yet remains unsaid.
Title:  
Title:  Aside from those more obvious considerations touching Moby Dick,
Title:  which could not but occasionally awaken in any man's soul some alarm,
Title:  there was another thought, or rather vague, nameless horror
Title:  concerning him, which at times by its intensity completely
Title:  overpowered all the rest; and yet so mystical and well nigh ineffable
Title:  was it, that I almost despair of putting it in a comprehensible form.
Title:  It was the whiteness of the whale that above all things appalled me.
Title:  But how can I hope to explain myself here; and yet, in some dim,
Title:  random way, explain myself I must, else all these chapters might be
Title:  naught.
Title:  
Title:  Though in many natural objects, whiteness refiningly enhances beauty,
Title:  as if imparting some special virtue of its own, as in marbles,
Title:  japonicas, and pearls; and though various nations have in some way
Title:  recognised a certain royal preeminence in this hue; even the
Title:  barbaric, grand old kings of Pegu placing the title "Lord of the
Title:  White Elephants" above all their other magniloquent ascriptions of
Title:  dominion; and the modern kings of Siam unfurling the same snow-white
Title:  quadruped in the royal standard; and the Hanoverian flag bearing the
Title:  one figure of a snow-white charger; and the great Austrian Empire,
Title:  Caesarian, heir to overlording Rome, having for the imperial colour
Title:  the same imperial hue; and though this pre-eminence in it applies to
Title:  the human race itself, giving the white man ideal mastership over
Title:  every dusky tribe; and though, besides, all this, whiteness has been
Title:  even made significant of gladness, for among the Romans a white stone
Title:  marked a joyful day; and though in other mortal sympathies and
Title:  symbolizings, this same hue is made the emblem of many touching,
Title:  noble things--the innocence of brides, the benignity of age; though
Title:  among the Red Men of America the giving of the white belt of wampum
Title:  was the deepest pledge of honour; though in many climes, whiteness
Title:  typifies the majesty of Justice in the ermine of the Judge, and
Title:  contributes to the daily state of kings and queens drawn by
Title:  milk-white steeds; though even in the higher mysteries of the most
Title:  august religions it has been made the symbol of the divine
Title:  spotlessness and power; by the Persian fire worshippers, the white
Title:  forked flame being held the holiest on the altar; and in the Greek
Title:  mythologies, Great Jove himself being made incarnate in a snow-white
Title:  bull; and though to the noble Iroquois, the midwinter sacrifice of
Title:  the sacred White Dog was by far the holiest festival of their
Title:  theology, that spotless, faithful creature being held the purest
Title:  envoy they could send to the Great Spirit with the annual tidings of
Title:  their own fidelity; and though directly from the Latin word for
Title:  white, all Christian priests derive the name of one part of their
Title:  sacred vesture, the alb or tunic, worn beneath the cassock; and
Title:  though among the holy pomps of the Romish faith, white is specially
Title:  employed in the celebration of the Passion of our Lord; though in the
Title:  Vision of St. John, white robes are given to the redeemed, and the
Title:  four-and-twenty elders stand clothed in white before the great-white
Title:  throne, and the Holy One that sitteth there white like wool; yet for
Title:  all these accumulated associations, with whatever is sweet, and
Title:  honourable, and sublime, there yet lurks an elusive something in the
Title:  innermost idea of this hue, which strikes more of panic to the soul
Title:  than that redness which affrights in blood.
Title:  
Title:  This elusive quality it is, which causes the thought of whiteness,
Title:  when divorced from more kindly associations, and coupled with any
Title:  object terrible in itself, to heighten that terror to the furthest
Title:  bounds.  Witness the white bear of the poles, and the white shark of
Title:  the tropics; what but their smooth, flaky whiteness makes them the
Title:  transcendent horrors they are?  That ghastly whiteness it is which
Title:  imparts such an abhorrent mildness, even more loathsome than
Title:  terrific, to the dumb gloating of their aspect.  So that not the
Title:  fierce-fanged tiger in his heraldic coat can so stagger courage as
Title:  the white-shrouded bear or shark.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *With reference to the Polar bear, it may possibly be urged by him
Title:  who would fain go still deeper into this matter, that it is not the
Title:  whiteness, separately regarded, which heightens the intolerable
Title:  hideousness of that brute; for, analysed, that heightened
Title:  hideousness, it might be said, only rises from the circumstance, that
Title:  the irresponsible ferociousness of the creature stands invested in
Title:  the fleece of celestial innocence and love; and hence, by bringing
Title:  together two such opposite emotions in our minds, the Polar bear
Title:  frightens us with so unnatural a contrast.  But even assuming all
Title:  this to be true; yet, were it not for the whiteness, you would not
Title:  have that intensified terror.
Title:  
Title:  As for the white shark, the white gliding ghostliness of repose in
Title:  that creature, when beheld in his ordinary moods, strangely tallies
Title:  with the same quality in the Polar quadruped.  This peculiarity is
Title:  most vividly hit by the French in the name they bestow upon that
Title:  fish.  The Romish mass for the dead begins with "Requiem eternam"
Title:  (eternal rest), whence REQUIEM denominating the mass itself, and any
Title:  other funeral music.  Now, in allusion to the white, silent stillness
Title:  of death in this shark, and the mild deadliness of his habits, the
Title:  French call him REQUIN.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Bethink thee of the albatross, whence come those clouds of spiritual
Title:  wonderment and pale dread, in which that white phantom sails in all
Title:  imaginations?  Not Coleridge first threw that spell; but God's great,
Title:  unflattering laureate, Nature.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *I remember the first albatross I ever saw.  It was during a
Title:  prolonged gale, in waters hard upon the Antarctic seas.  From my
Title:  forenoon watch below, I ascended to the overclouded deck; and there,
Title:  dashed upon the main hatches, I saw a regal, feathery thing of
Title:  unspotted whiteness, and with a hooked, Roman bill sublime.  At
Title:  intervals, it arched forth its vast archangel wings, as if to embrace
Title:  some holy ark.  Wondrous flutterings and throbbings shook it.  Though
Title:  bodily unharmed, it uttered cries, as some king's ghost in
Title:  supernatural distress.  Through its inexpressible, strange eyes,
Title:  methought I peeped to secrets which took hold of God.  As Abraham
Title:  before the angels, I bowed myself; the white thing was so white, its
Title:  wings so wide, and in those for ever exiled waters, I had lost the
Title:  miserable warping memories of traditions and of towns.  Long I gazed
Title:  at that prodigy of plumage.  I cannot tell, can only hint, the things
Title:  that darted through me then.  But at last I awoke; and turning, asked
Title:  a sailor what bird was this.  A goney, he replied.  Goney! never had
Title:  heard that name before; is it conceivable that this glorious thing is
Title:  utterly unknown to men ashore! never!  But some time after, I learned
Title:  that goney was some seaman's name for albatross.  So that by no
Title:  possibility could Coleridge's wild Rhyme have had aught to do with
Title:  those mystical impressions which were mine, when I saw that bird upon
Title:  our deck.  For neither had I then read the Rhyme, nor knew the bird
Title:  to be an albatross.  Yet, in saying this, I do but indirectly burnish
Title:  a little brighter the noble merit of the poem and the poet.
Title:  
Title:  I assert, then, that in the wondrous bodily whiteness of the bird
Title:  chiefly lurks the secret of the spell; a truth the more evinced in
Title:  this, that by a solecism of terms there are birds called grey
Title:  albatrosses; and these I have frequently seen, but never with such
Title:  emotions as when I beheld the Antarctic fowl.
Title:  
Title:  But how had the mystic thing been caught?  Whisper it not, and I will
Title:  tell; with a treacherous hook and line, as the fowl floated on the
Title:  sea.  At last the Captain made a postman of it; tying a lettered,
Title:  leathern tally round its neck, with the ship's time and place; and
Title:  then letting it escape.  But I doubt not, that leathern tally, meant
Title:  for man, was taken off in Heaven, when the white fowl flew to join
Title:  the wing-folding, the invoking, and adoring cherubim!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Most famous in our Western annals and Indian traditions is that of
Title:  the White Steed of the Prairies; a magnificent milk-white charger,
Title:  large-eyed, small-headed, bluff-chested, and with the dignity of a
Title:  thousand monarchs in his lofty, overscorning carriage.  He was the
Title:  elected Xerxes of vast herds of wild horses, whose pastures in those
Title:  days were only fenced by the Rocky Mountains and the Alleghanies.  At
Title:  their flaming head he westward trooped it like that chosen star which
Title:  every evening leads on the hosts of light.  The flashing cascade of
Title:  his mane, the curving comet of his tail, invested him with housings
Title:  more resplendent than gold and silver-beaters could have furnished
Title:  him.  A most imperial and archangelical apparition of that unfallen,
Title:  western world, which to the eyes of the old trappers and hunters
Title:  revived the glories of those primeval times when Adam walked majestic
Title:  as a god, bluff-browed and fearless as this mighty steed.  Whether
Title:  marching amid his aides and marshals in the van of countless cohorts
Title:  that endlessly streamed it over the plains, like an Ohio; or whether
Title:  with his circumambient subjects browsing all around at the horizon,
Title:  the White Steed gallopingly reviewed them with warm nostrils
Title:  reddening through his cool milkiness; in whatever aspect he presented
Title:  himself, always to the bravest Indians he was the object of trembling
Title:  reverence and awe.  Nor can it be questioned from what stands on
Title:  legendary record of this noble horse, that it was his spiritual
Title:  whiteness chiefly, which so clothed him with divineness; and that
Title:  this divineness had that in it which, though commanding worship, at
Title:  the same time enforced a certain nameless terror.
Title:  
Title:  But there are other instances where this whiteness loses all that
Title:  accessory and strange glory which invests it in the White Steed and
Title:  Albatross.
Title:  
Title:  What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often
Title:  shocks the eye, as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and
Title:  kin!  It is that whiteness which invests him, a thing expressed by
Title:  the name he bears.  The Albino is as well made as other men--has no
Title:  substantive deformity--and yet this mere aspect of all-pervading
Title:  whiteness makes him more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion.
Title:  Why should this be so?
Title:  
Title:  Nor, in quite other aspects, does Nature in her least palpable but
Title:  not the less malicious agencies, fail to enlist among her forces this
Title:  crowning attribute of the terrible.  From its snowy aspect, the
Title:  gauntleted ghost of the Southern Seas has been denominated the White
Title:  Squall.  Nor, in some historic instances, has the art of human malice
Title:  omitted so potent an auxiliary.  How wildly it heightens the effect
Title:  of that passage in Froissart, when, masked in the snowy symbol of
Title:  their faction, the desperate White Hoods of Ghent murder their
Title:  bailiff in the market-place!
Title:  
Title:  Nor, in some things, does the common, hereditary experience of all
Title:  mankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this hue.  It
Title:  cannot well be doubted, that the one visible quality in the aspect of
Title:  the dead which most appals the gazer, is the marble pallor lingering
Title:  there; as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge of
Title:  consternation in the other world, as of mortal trepidation here.  And
Title:  from that pallor of the dead, we borrow the expressive hue of the
Title:  shroud in which we wrap them.  Nor even in our superstitions do we
Title:  fail to throw the same snowy mantle round our phantoms; all ghosts
Title:  rising in a milk-white fog--Yea, while these terrors seize us, let us
Title:  add, that even the king of terrors, when personified by the
Title:  evangelist, rides on his pallid horse.
Title:  
Title:  Therefore, in his other moods, symbolize whatever grand or gracious
Title:  thing he will by whiteness, no man can deny that in its profoundest
Title:  idealized significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul.
Title:  
Title:  But though without dissent this point be fixed, how is mortal man to
Title:  account for it?  To analyse it, would seem impossible.  Can we,
Title:  then, by the citation of some of those instances wherein this thing
Title:  of whiteness--though for the time either wholly or in great part
Title:  stripped of all direct associations calculated to impart to it aught
Title:  fearful, but nevertheless, is found to exert over us the same
Title:  sorcery, however modified;--can we thus hope to light upon some
Title:  chance clue to conduct us to the hidden cause we seek?
Title:  
Title:  Let us try.  But in a matter like this, subtlety appeals to subtlety,
Title:  and without imagination no man can follow another into these halls.
Title:  And though, doubtless, some at least of the imaginative impressions
Title:  about to be presented may have been shared by most men, yet few
Title:  perhaps were entirely conscious of them at the time, and therefore
Title:  may not be able to recall them now.
Title:  
Title:  Why to the man of untutored ideality, who happens to be but loosely
Title:  acquainted with the peculiar character of the day, does the bare
Title:  mention of Whitsuntide marshal in the fancy such long, dreary,
Title:  speechless processions of slow-pacing pilgrims, down-cast and hooded
Title:  with new-fallen snow?  Or, to the unread, unsophisticated Protestant
Title:  of the Middle American States, why does the passing mention of a
Title:  White Friar or a White Nun, evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul?
Title:  
Title:  Or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors and
Title:  kings (which will not wholly account for it) that makes the White
Title:  Tower of London tell so much more strongly on the imagination of an
Title:  untravelled American, than those other storied structures, its
Title:  neighbors--the Byward Tower, or even the Bloody?  And those sublimer
Title:  towers, the White Mountains of New Hampshire, whence, in peculiar
Title:  moods, comes that gigantic ghostliness over the soul at the bare
Title:  mention of that name, while the thought of Virginia's Blue Ridge is
Title:  full of a soft, dewy, distant dreaminess?  Or why, irrespective of
Title:  all latitudes and longitudes, does the name of the White Sea exert
Title:  such a spectralness over the fancy, while that of the Yellow Sea
Title:  lulls us with mortal thoughts of long lacquered mild afternoons on
Title:  the waves, followed by the gaudiest and yet sleepiest of sunsets?
Title:  Or, to choose a wholly unsubstantial instance, purely addressed to
Title:  the fancy, why, in reading the old fairy tales of Central Europe,
Title:  does "the tall pale man" of the Hartz forests, whose changeless
Title:  pallor unrustlingly glides through the green of the groves--why is
Title:  this phantom more terrible than all the whooping imps of the
Title:  Blocksburg?
Title:  
Title:  Nor is it, altogether, the remembrance of her cathedral-toppling
Title:  earthquakes; nor the stampedoes of her frantic seas; nor the
Title:  tearlessness of arid skies that never rain; nor the sight of her
Title:  wide field of leaning spires, wrenched cope-stones, and crosses all
Title:  adroop (like canted yards of anchored fleets); and her suburban
Title:  avenues of house-walls lying over upon each other, as a tossed pack
Title:  of cards;--it is not these things alone which make tearless Lima, the
Title:  strangest, saddest city thou can'st see.  For Lima has taken the
Title:  white veil; and there is a higher horror in this whiteness of her
Title:  woe.  Old as Pizarro, this whiteness keeps her ruins for ever new;
Title:  admits not the cheerful greenness of complete decay; spreads over her
Title:  broken ramparts the rigid pallor of an apoplexy that fixes its own
Title:  distortions.
Title:  
Title:  I know that, to the common apprehension, this phenomenon of whiteness
Title:  is not confessed to be the prime agent in exaggerating the terror of
Title:  objects otherwise terrible; nor to the unimaginative mind is there
Title:  aught of terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another mind
Title:  almost solely consists in this one phenomenon, especially when
Title:  exhibited under any form at all approaching to muteness or
Title:  universality.  What I mean by these two statements may perhaps be
Title:  respectively elucidated by the following examples.
Title:  
Title:  First: The mariner, when drawing nigh the coasts of foreign lands, if
Title:  by night he hear the roar of breakers, starts to vigilance, and feels
Title:  just enough of trepidation to sharpen all his faculties; but under
Title:  precisely similar circumstances, let him be called from his hammock
Title:  to view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milky
Title:  whiteness--as if from encircling headlands shoals of combed white
Title:  bears were swimming round him, then he feels a silent, superstitious
Title:  dread; the shrouded phantom of the whitened waters is horrible to him
Title:  as a real ghost; in vain the lead assures him he is still off
Title:  soundings; heart and helm they both go down; he never rests till blue
Title:  water is under him again.  Yet where is the mariner who will tell
Title:  thee, "Sir, it was not so much the fear of striking hidden rocks, as
Title:  the fear of that hideous whiteness that so stirred me?"
Title:  
Title:  Second: To the native Indian of Peru, the continual sight of the
Title:  snowhowdahed Andes conveys naught of dread, except, perhaps, in the
Title:  mere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning at such
Title:  vast altitudes, and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness it
Title:  would be to lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes.  Much the same is
Title:  it with the backwoodsman of the West, who with comparative
Title:  indifference views an unbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow, no
Title:  shadow of tree or twig to break the fixed trance of whiteness.  Not
Title:  so the sailor, beholding the scenery of the Antarctic seas; where at
Title:  times, by some infernal trick of legerdemain in the powers of frost
Title:  and air, he, shivering and half shipwrecked, instead of rainbows
Title:  speaking hope and solace to his misery, views what seems a boundless
Title:  churchyard grinning upon him with its lean ice monuments and
Title:  splintered crosses.
Title:  
Title:  But thou sayest, methinks that white-lead chapter about whiteness is
Title:  but a white flag hung out from a craven soul; thou surrenderest to a
Title:  hypo, Ishmael.
Title:  
Title:  Tell me, why this strong young colt, foaled in some peaceful valley
Title:  of Vermont, far removed from all beasts of prey--why is it that upon
Title:  the sunniest day, if you but shake a fresh buffalo robe behind him,
Title:  so that he cannot even see it, but only smells its wild animal
Title:  muskiness--why will he start, snort, and with bursting eyes paw the
Title:  ground in phrensies of affright?  There is no remembrance in him of
Title:  any gorings of wild creatures in his green northern home, so that the
Title:  strange muskiness he smells cannot recall to him anything associated
Title:  with the experience of former perils; for what knows he, this New
Title:  England colt, of the black bisons of distant Oregon?
Title:  
Title:  No; but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute, the instinct of the
Title:  knowledge of the demonism in the world.  Though thousands of miles
Title:  from Oregon, still when he smells that savage musk, the rending,
Title:  goring bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of the
Title:  prairies, which this instant they may be trampling into dust.
Title:  
Title:  Thus, then, the muffled rollings of a milky sea; the bleak rustlings
Title:  of the festooned frosts of mountains; the desolate shiftings of the
Title:  windrowed snows of prairies; all these, to Ishmael, are as the
Title:  shaking of that buffalo robe to the frightened colt!
Title:  
Title:  Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of which the
Title:  mystic sign gives forth such hints; yet with me, as with the colt,
Title:  somewhere those things must exist.  Though in many of its aspects
Title:  this visible world seems formed in love, the invisible spheres were
Title:  formed in fright.
Title:  
Title:  But not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness, and
Title:  learned why it appeals with such power to the soul; and more strange
Title:  and far more portentous--why, as we have seen, it is at once the most
Title:  meaning symbol of spiritual things, nay, the very veil of the
Title:  Christian's Deity; and yet should be as it is, the intensifying agent
Title:  in things the most appalling to mankind.
Title:  
Title:  Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voids
Title:  and immensities of the universe, and thus stabs us from behind with
Title:  the thought of annihilation, when beholding the white depths of the
Title:  milky way?  Or is it, that as in essence whiteness is not so much a
Title:  colour as the visible absence of colour; and at the same time the
Title:  concrete of all colours; is it for these reasons that there is such a
Title:  dumb blankness, full of meaning, in a wide landscape of snows--a
Title:  colourless, all-colour of atheism from which we shrink?  And when we
Title:  consider that other theory of the natural philosophers, that all
Title:  other earthly hues--every stately or lovely emblazoning--the sweet
Title:  tinges of sunset skies and woods; yea, and the gilded velvets of
Title:  butterflies, and the butterfly cheeks of young girls; all these are
Title:  but subtile deceits, not actually inherent in substances, but only
Title:  laid on from without; so that all deified Nature absolutely paints
Title:  like the harlot, whose allurements cover nothing but the
Title:  charnel-house within; and when we proceed further, and consider that
Title:  the mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her hues, the great
Title:  principle of light, for ever remains white or colourless in itself,
Title:  and if operating without medium upon matter, would touch all objects,
Title:  even tulips and roses, with its own blank tinge--pondering all this,
Title:  the palsied universe lies before us a leper; and like wilful
Title:  travellers in Lapland, who refuse to wear coloured and colouring
Title:  glasses upon their eyes, so the wretched infidel gazes himself blind
Title:  at the monumental white shroud that wraps all the prospect around
Title:  him.  And of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol.
Title:  Wonder ye then at the fiery hunt?
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 43
Title:  
Title:  Hark!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "HIST!  Did you hear that noise, Cabaco?
Title:  
Title:  It was the middle-watch; a fair moonlight; the seamen were standing
Title:  in a cordon, extending from one of the fresh-water butts in the
Title:  waist, to the scuttle-butt near the taffrail.  In this manner, they
Title:  passed the buckets to fill the scuttle-butt.  Standing, for the most
Title:  part, on the hallowed precincts of the quarter-deck, they were
Title:  careful not to speak or rustle their feet.  From hand to hand, the
Title:  buckets went in the deepest silence, only broken by the occasional
Title:  flap of a sail, and the steady hum of the unceasingly advancing keel.
Title:  
Title:  It was in the midst of this repose, that Archy, one of the cordon,
Title:  whose post was near the after-hatches, whispered to his neighbor, a
Title:  Cholo, the words above.
Title:  
Title:  "Hist! did you hear that noise, Cabaco?"
Title:  
Title:  "Take the bucket, will ye, Archy? what noise d'ye mean?"
Title:  
Title:  "There it is again--under the hatches--don't you hear it--a cough--it
Title:  sounded like a cough."
Title:  
Title:  "Cough be damned!  Pass along that return bucket."
Title:  
Title:  "There again--there it is!--it sounds like two or three sleepers
Title:  turning over, now!"
Title:  
Title:  "Caramba! have done, shipmate, will ye?  It's the three soaked
Title:  biscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye--nothing else.
Title:  Look to the bucket!"
Title:  
Title:  "Say what ye will, shipmate; I've sharp ears."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, you are the chap, ain't ye, that heard the hum of the old
Title:  Quakeress's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nantucket;
Title:  you're the chap."
Title:  
Title:  "Grin away; we'll see what turns up.  Hark ye, Cabaco, there is
Title:  somebody down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck;
Title:  and I suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too.  I heard Stubb
Title:  tell Flask, one morning watch, that there was something of that sort
Title:  in the wind."
Title:  
Title:  "Tish! the bucket!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 44
Title:  
Title:  The Chart.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Had you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin after the squall
Title:  that took place on the night succeeding that wild ratification of his
Title:  purpose with his crew, you would have seen him go to a locker in the
Title:  transom, and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish sea
Title:  charts, spread them before him on his screwed-down table.  Then
Title:  seating himself before it, you would have seen him intently study the
Title:  various lines and shadings which there met his eye; and with slow but
Title:  steady pencil trace additional courses over spaces that before were
Title:  blank.  At intervals, he would refer to piles of old log-books beside
Title:  him, wherein were set down the seasons and places in which, on
Title:  various former voyages of various ships, sperm whales had been
Title:  captured or seen.
Title:  
Title:  While thus employed, the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains over
Title:  his head, continually rocked with the motion of the ship, and for
Title:  ever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkled
Title:  brow, till it almost seemed that while he himself was marking out
Title:  lines and courses on the wrinkled charts, some invisible pencil was
Title:  also tracing lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his
Title:  forehead.
Title:  
Title:  But it was not this night in particular that, in the solitude of his
Title:  cabin, Ahab thus pondered over his charts.  Almost every night they
Title:  were brought out; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced,
Title:  and others were substituted.  For with the charts of all four oceans
Title:  before him, Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies, with a
Title:  view to the more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of
Title:  his soul.
Title:  
Title:  Now, to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans,
Title:  it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitary
Title:  creature in the unhooped oceans of this planet.  But not so did it
Title:  seem to Ahab, who knew the sets of all tides and currents; and
Title:  thereby calculating the driftings of the sperm whale's food; and,
Title:  also, calling to mind the regular, ascertained seasons for hunting
Title:  him in particular latitudes; could arrive at reasonable surmises,
Title:  almost approaching to certainties, concerning the timeliest day to be
Title:  upon this or that ground in search of his prey.
Title:  
Title:  So assured, indeed, is the fact concerning the periodicalness of the
Title:  sperm whale's resorting to given waters, that many hunters believe
Title:  that, could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world;
Title:  were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefully
Title:  collated, then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to
Title:  correspond in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or the
Title:  flights of swallows.  On this hint, attempts have been made to
Title:  construct elaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *Since the above was written, the statement is happily borne out by
Title:  an official circular, issued by Lieutenant Maury, of the National
Title:  Observatory, Washington, April 16th, 1851.  By that circular, it
Title:  appears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion; and
Title:  portions of it are presented in the circular.  "This chart divides
Title:  the ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degrees
Title:  of longitude; perpendicularly through each of which districts are
Title:  twelve columns for the twelve months; and horizontally through each
Title:  of which districts are three lines; one to show the number of days
Title:  that have been spent in each month in every district, and the two
Title:  others to show the number of days in which whales, sperm or right,
Title:  have been seen."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Besides, when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another,
Title:  the sperm whales, guided by some infallible instinct--say, rather,
Title:  secret intelligence from the Deity--mostly swim in VEINS, as they are
Title:  called; continuing their way along a given ocean-line with such
Title:  undeviating exactitude, that no ship ever sailed her course, by any
Title:  chart, with one tithe of such marvellous precision.  Though, in these
Title:  cases, the direction taken by any one whale be straight as a
Title:  surveyor's parallel, and though the line of advance be strictly
Title:  confined to its own unavoidable, straight wake, yet the arbitrary
Title:  VEIN in which at these times he is said to swim, generally embraces
Title:  some few miles in width (more or less, as the vein is presumed to
Title:  expand or contract); but never exceeds the visual sweep from the
Title:  whale-ship's mast-heads, when circumspectly gliding along this magic
Title:  zone.  The sum is, that at particular seasons within that breadth and
Title:  along that path, migrating whales may with great confidence be looked
Title:  for.
Title:  
Title:  And hence not only at substantiated times, upon well known separate
Title:  feeding-grounds, could Ahab hope to encounter his prey; but in
Title:  crossing the widest expanses of water between those grounds he could,
Title:  by his art, so place and time himself on his way, as even then not to
Title:  be wholly without prospect of a meeting.
Title:  
Title:  There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle his
Title:  delirious but still methodical scheme.  But not so in the reality,
Title:  perhaps.  Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular
Title:  seasons for particular grounds, yet in general you cannot conclude
Title:  that the herds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitude
Title:  this year, say, will turn out to be identically the same with those
Title:  that were found there the preceding season; though there are peculiar
Title:  and unquestionable instances where the contrary of this has proved
Title:  true.  In general, the same remark, only within a less wide limit,
Title:  applies to the solitaries and hermits among the matured, aged sperm
Title:  whales.  So that though Moby Dick had in a former year been seen, for
Title:  example, on what is called the Seychelle ground in the Indian ocean,
Title:  or Volcano Bay on the Japanese Coast; yet it did not follow, that
Title:  were the Pequod to visit either of those spots at any subsequent
Title:  corresponding season, she would infallibly encounter him there.  So,
Title:  too, with some other feeding grounds, where he had at times revealed
Title:  himself.  But all these seemed only his casual stopping-places and
Title:  ocean-inns, so to speak, not his places of prolonged abode.  And
Title:  where Ahab's chances of accomplishing his object have hitherto been
Title:  spoken of, allusion has only been made to whatever way-side,
Title:  antecedent, extra prospects were his, ere a particular set time or
Title:  place were attained, when all possibilities would become
Title:  probabilities, and, as Ahab fondly thought, every possibility the
Title:  next thing to a certainty.  That particular set time and place were
Title:  conjoined in the one technical phrase--the Season-on-the-Line.  For
Title:  there and then, for several consecutive years, Moby Dick had been
Title:  periodically descried, lingering in those waters for awhile, as the
Title:  sun, in its annual round, loiters for a predicted interval in any one
Title:  sign of the Zodiac.  There it was, too, that most of the deadly
Title:  encounters with the white whale had taken place; there the waves were
Title:  storied with his deeds; there also was that tragic spot where the
Title:  monomaniac old man had found the awful motive to his vengeance.  But
Title:  in the cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering vigilance with
Title:  which Ahab threw his brooding soul into this unfaltering hunt, he
Title:  would not permit himself to rest all his hopes upon the one crowning
Title:  fact above mentioned, however flattering it might be to those hopes;
Title:  nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillize his
Title:  unquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest.
Title:  
Title:  Now, the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning of
Title:  the Season-on-the-Line.  No possible endeavor then could enable her
Title:  commander to make the great passage southwards, double Cape Horn, and
Title:  then running down sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorial
Title:  Pacific in time to cruise there.  Therefore, he must wait for the
Title:  next ensuing season.  Yet the premature hour of the Pequod's sailing
Title:  had, perhaps, been correctly selected by Ahab, with a view to this
Title:  very complexion of things.  Because, an interval of three hundred and
Title:  sixty-five days and nights was before him; an interval which, instead
Title:  of impatiently enduring ashore, he would spend in a miscellaneous
Title:  hunt; if by chance the White Whale, spending his vacation in seas far
Title:  remote from his periodical feeding-grounds, should turn up his
Title:  wrinkled brow off the Persian Gulf, or in the Bengal Bay, or China
Title:  Seas, or in any other waters haunted by his race.  So that Monsoons,
Title:  Pampas, Nor'-Westers, Harmattans, Trades; any wind but the Levanter
Title:  and Simoon, might blow Moby Dick into the devious zig-zag
Title:  world-circle of the Pequod's circumnavigating wake.
Title:  
Title:  But granting all this; yet, regarded discreetly and coolly, seems it
Title:  not but a mad idea, this; that in the broad boundless ocean, one
Title:  solitary whale, even if encountered, should be thought capable of
Title:  individual recognition from his hunter, even as a white-bearded Mufti
Title:  in the thronged thoroughfares of Constantinople?  Yes.  For the
Title:  peculiar snow-white brow of Moby Dick, and his snow-white hump, could
Title:  not but be unmistakable.  And have I not tallied the whale, Ahab
Title:  would mutter to himself, as after poring over his charts till long
Title:  after midnight he would throw himself back in reveries--tallied him,
Title:  and shall he escape?  His broad fins are bored, and scalloped out
Title:  like a lost sheep's ear!  And here, his mad mind would run on in a
Title:  breathless race; till a weariness and faintness of pondering came
Title:  over him; and in the open air of the deck he would seek to recover
Title:  his strength.  Ah, God! what trances of torments does that man endure
Title:  who is consumed with one unachieved revengeful desire.  He sleeps
Title:  with clenched hands; and wakes with his own bloody nails in his
Title:  palms.
Title:  
Title:  Often, when forced from his hammock by exhausting and intolerably
Title:  vivid dreams of the night, which, resuming his own intense thoughts
Title:  through the day, carried them on amid a clashing of phrensies, and
Title:  whirled them round and round and round in his blazing brain, till
Title:  the very throbbing of his life-spot became insufferable anguish; and
Title:  when, as was sometimes the case, these spiritual throes in him heaved
Title:  his being up from its base, and a chasm seemed opening in him, from
Title:  which forked flames and lightnings shot up, and accursed fiends
Title:  beckoned him to leap down among them; when this hell in himself
Title:  yawned beneath him, a wild cry would be heard through the ship; and
Title:  with glaring eyes Ahab would burst from his state room, as though
Title:  escaping from a bed that was on fire.  Yet these, perhaps, instead of
Title:  being the unsuppressable symptoms of some latent weakness, or fright
Title:  at his own resolve, were but the plainest tokens of its intensity.
Title:  For, at such times, crazy Ahab, the scheming, unappeasedly steadfast
Title:  hunter of the white whale; this Ahab that had gone to his hammock,
Title:  was not the agent that so caused him to burst from it in horror
Title:  again.  The latter was the eternal, living principle or soul in him;
Title:  and in sleep, being for the time dissociated from the characterizing
Title:  mind, which at other times employed it for its outer vehicle or
Title:  agent, it spontaneously sought escape from the scorching contiguity
Title:  of the frantic thing, of which, for the time, it was no longer an
Title:  integral.  But as the mind does not exist unless leagued with the
Title:  soul, therefore it must have been that, in Ahab's case, yielding up
Title:  all his thoughts and fancies to his one supreme purpose; that
Title:  purpose, by its own sheer inveteracy of will, forced itself against
Title:  gods and devils into a kind of self-assumed, independent being of its
Title:  own.  Nay, could grimly live and burn, while the common vitality to
Title:  which it was conjoined, fled horror-stricken from the unbidden and
Title:  unfathered birth.  Therefore, the tormented spirit that glared out of
Title:  bodily eyes, when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room, was for the
Title:  time but a vacated thing, a formless somnambulistic being, a ray of
Title:  living light, to be sure, but without an object to colour, and
Title:  therefore a blankness in itself.  God help thee, old man, thy
Title:  thoughts have created a creature in thee; and he whose intense
Title:  thinking thus makes him a Prometheus; a vulture feeds upon that heart
Title:  for ever; that vulture the very creature he creates.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 45
Title:  
Title:  The Affidavit.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  So far as what there may be of a narrative in this book; and, indeed,
Title:  as indirectly touching one or two very interesting and curious
Title:  particulars in the habits of sperm whales, the foregoing chapter, in
Title:  its earlier part, is as important a one as will be found in this
Title:  volume; but the leading matter of it requires to be still further and
Title:  more familiarly enlarged upon, in order to be adequately understood,
Title:  and moreover to take away any incredulity which a profound ignorance
Title:  of the entire subject may induce in some minds, as to the natural
Title:  verity of the main points of this affair.
Title:  
Title:  I care not to perform this part of my task methodically; but shall be
Title:  content to produce the desired impression by separate citations of
Title:  items, practically or reliably known to me as a whaleman; and from
Title:  these citations, I take it--the conclusion aimed at will naturally
Title:  follow of itself.
Title:  
Title:  First: I have personally known three instances where a whale, after
Title:  receiving a harpoon, has effected a complete escape; and, after an
Title:  interval (in one instance of three years), has been again struck by
Title:  the same hand, and slain; when the two irons, both marked by the same
Title:  private cypher, have been taken from the body.  In the instance where
Title:  three years intervened between the flinging of the two harpoons; and
Title:  I think it may have been something more than that; the man who darted
Title:  them happening, in the interval, to go in a trading ship on a voyage
Title:  to Africa, went ashore there, joined a discovery party, and
Title:  penetrated far into the interior, where he travelled for a period of
Title:  nearly two years, often endangered by serpents, savages, tigers,
Title:  poisonous miasmas, with all the other common perils incident to
Title:  wandering in the heart of unknown regions.  Meanwhile, the whale he
Title:  had struck must also have been on its travels; no doubt it had thrice
Title:  circumnavigated the globe, brushing with its flanks all the coasts of
Title:  Africa; but to no purpose.  This man and this whale again came
Title:  together, and the one vanquished the other.  I say I, myself, have
Title:  known three instances similar to this; that is in two of them I saw
Title:  the whales struck; and, upon the second attack, saw the two irons
Title:  with the respective marks cut in them, afterwards taken from the dead
Title:  fish.  In the three-year instance, it so fell out that I was in the
Title:  boat both times, first and last, and the last time distinctly
Title:  recognised a peculiar sort of huge mole under the whale's eye, which
Title:  I had observed there three years previous.  I say three years, but I
Title:  am pretty sure it was more than that.  Here are three instances,
Title:  then, which I personally know the truth of; but I have heard of many
Title:  other instances from persons whose veracity in the matter there is no
Title:  good ground to impeach.
Title:  
Title:  Secondly: It is well known in the Sperm Whale Fishery, however
Title:  ignorant the world ashore may be of it, that there have been several
Title:  memorable historical instances where a particular whale in the ocean
Title:  has been at distant times and places popularly cognisable.  Why such
Title:  a whale became thus marked was not altogether and originally owing to
Title:  his bodily peculiarities as distinguished from other whales; for
Title:  however peculiar in that respect any chance whale may be, they soon
Title:  put an end to his peculiarities by killing him, and boiling him down
Title:  into a peculiarly valuable oil.  No: the reason was this: that from
Title:  the fatal experiences of the fishery there hung a terrible prestige
Title:  of perilousness about such a whale as there did about Rinaldo
Title:  Rinaldini, insomuch that most fishermen were content to recognise him
Title:  by merely touching their tarpaulins when he would be discovered
Title:  lounging by them on the sea, without seeking to cultivate a more
Title:  intimate acquaintance.  Like some poor devils ashore that happen to
Title:  know an irascible great man, they make distant unobtrusive
Title:  salutations to him in the street, lest if they pursued the
Title:  acquaintance further, they might receive a summary thump for their
Title:  presumption.
Title:  
Title:  But not only did each of these famous whales enjoy great individual
Title:  celebrity--Nay, you may call it an ocean-wide renown; not only was he
Title:  famous in life and now is immortal in forecastle stories after death,
Title:  but he was admitted into all the rights, privileges, and distinctions
Title:  of a name; had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or Caesar.  Was it
Title:  not so, O Timor Tom! thou famed leviathan, scarred like an iceberg,
Title:  who so long did'st lurk in the Oriental straits of that name, whose
Title:  spout was oft seen from the palmy beach of Ombay?  Was it not so, O
Title:  New Zealand Jack! thou terror of all cruisers that crossed their
Title:  wakes in the vicinity of the Tattoo Land?  Was it not so, O Morquan!
Title:  King of Japan, whose lofty jet they say at times assumed the
Title:  semblance of a snow-white cross against the sky?  Was it not so, O
Title:  Don Miguel! thou Chilian whale, marked like an old tortoise with
Title:  mystic hieroglyphics upon the back!  In plain prose, here are four
Title:  whales as well known to the students of Cetacean History as Marius or
Title:  Sylla to the classic scholar.
Title:  
Title:  But this is not all.  New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel, after at
Title:  various times creating great havoc among the boats of different
Title:  vessels, were finally gone in quest of, systematically hunted out,
Title:  chased and killed by valiant whaling captains, who heaved up their
Title:  anchors with that express object as much in view, as in setting out
Title:  through the Narragansett Woods, Captain Butler of old had it in his
Title:  mind to capture that notorious murderous savage Annawon, the headmost
Title:  warrior of the Indian King Philip.
Title:  
Title:  I do not know where I can find a better place than just here, to make
Title:  mention of one or two other things, which to me seem important, as in
Title:  printed form establishing in all respects the reasonableness of the
Title:  whole story of the White Whale, more especially the catastrophe.  For
Title:  this is one of those disheartening instances where truth requires
Title:  full as much bolstering as error.  So ignorant are most landsmen of
Title:  some of the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world, that
Title:  without some hints touching the plain facts, historical and
Title:  otherwise, of the fishery, they might scout at Moby Dick as a
Title:  monstrous fable, or still worse and more detestable, a hideous and
Title:  intolerable allegory.
Title:  
Title:  First: Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the general
Title:  perils of the grand fishery, yet they have nothing like a fixed,
Title:  vivid conception of those perils, and the frequency with which they
Title:  recur.  One reason perhaps is, that not one in fifty of the actual
Title:  disasters and deaths by casualties in the fishery, ever finds a
Title:  public record at home, however transient and immediately forgotten
Title:  that record.  Do you suppose that that poor fellow there, who this
Title:  moment perhaps caught by the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea,
Title:  is being carried down to the bottom of the sea by the sounding
Title:  leviathan--do you suppose that that poor fellow's name will appear in
Title:  the newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast?
Title:  No: because the mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea.
Title:  In fact, did you ever hear what might be called regular news direct
Title:  or indirect from New Guinea?  Yet I tell you that upon one particular
Title:  voyage which I made to the Pacific, among many others we spoke thirty
Title:  different ships, every one of which had had a death by a whale, some
Title:  of them more than one, and three that had each lost a boat's crew.
Title:  For God's sake, be economical with your lamps and candles! not a
Title:  gallon you burn, but at least one drop of man's blood was spilled for
Title:  it.
Title:  
Title:  Secondly: People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale
Title:  is an enormous creature of enormous power; but I have ever found that
Title:  when narrating to them some specific example of this two-fold
Title:  enormousness, they have significantly complimented me upon my
Title:  facetiousness; when, I declare upon my soul, I had no more idea of
Title:  being facetious than Moses, when he wrote the history of the plagues
Title:  of Egypt.
Title:  
Title:  But fortunately the special point I here seek can be established upon
Title:  testimony entirely independent of my own.  That point is this: The
Title:  Sperm Whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful, knowing, and
Title:  judiciously malicious, as with direct aforethought to stave in,
Title:  utterly destroy, and sink a large ship; and what is more, the Sperm
Title:  Whale HAS done it.
Title:  
Title:  First: In the year 1820 the ship Essex, Captain Pollard, of
Title:  Nantucket, was cruising in the Pacific Ocean.  One day she saw
Title:  spouts, lowered her boats, and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales.
Title:  Ere long, several of the whales were wounded; when, suddenly, a very
Title:  large whale escaping from the boats, issued from the shoal, and bore
Title:  directly down upon the ship.  Dashing his forehead against her hull,
Title:  he so stove her in, that in less than "ten minutes" she settled down
Title:  and fell over.  Not a surviving plank of her has been seen since.
Title:  After the severest exposure, part of the crew reached the land in
Title:  their boats.  Being returned home at last, Captain Pollard once more
Title:  sailed for the Pacific in command of another ship, but the gods
Title:  shipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks and breakers; for the second
Title:  time his ship was utterly lost, and forthwith forswearing the sea, he
Title:  has never tempted it since.  At this day Captain Pollard is a
Title:  resident of Nantucket.  I have seen Owen Chace, who was chief mate of
Title:  the Essex at the time of the tragedy; I have read his plain and
Title:  faithful narrative; I have conversed with his son; and all this
Title:  within a few miles of the scene of the catastrophe.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *The following are extracts from Chace's narrative: "Every fact
Title:  seemed to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance
Title:  which directed his operations; he made two several attacks upon the
Title:  ship, at a short interval between them, both of which, according to
Title:  their direction, were calculated to do us the most injury, by being
Title:  made ahead, and thereby combining the speed of the two objects for
Title:  the shock; to effect which, the exact manoeuvres which he made were
Title:  necessary.  His aspect was most horrible, and such as indicated
Title:  resentment and fury.  He came directly from the shoal which we had
Title:  just before entered, and in which we had struck three of his
Title:  companions, as if fired with revenge for their sufferings."  Again:
Title:  "At all events, the whole circumstances taken together, all happening
Title:  before my own eyes, and producing, at the time, impressions in my
Title:  mind of decided, calculating mischief, on the part of the whale (many
Title:  of which impressions I cannot now recall), induce me to be satisfied
Title:  that I am correct in my opinion."
Title:  
Title:  Here are his reflections some time after quitting the ship, during a
Title:  black night an open boat, when almost despairing of reaching any
Title:  hospitable shore.  "The dark ocean and swelling waters were nothing;
Title:  the fears of being swallowed up by some dreadful tempest, or dashed
Title:  upon hidden rocks, with all the other ordinary subjects of fearful
Title:  contemplation, seemed scarcely entitled to a moment's thought; the
Title:  dismal looking wreck, and THE HORRID ASPECT AND REVENGE OF THE WHALE,
Title:  wholly engrossed my reflections, until day again made its
Title:  appearance."
Title:  
Title:  In another place--p. 45,--he speaks of "THE MYSTERIOUS AND MORTAL
Title:  ATTACK OF THE ANIMAL."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Secondly: The ship Union, also of Nantucket, was in the year 1807
Title:  totally lost off the Azores by a similar onset, but the authentic
Title:  particulars of this catastrophe I have never chanced to encounter,
Title:  though from the whale hunters I have now and then heard casual
Title:  allusions to it.
Title:  
Title:  Thirdly: Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commodore J---, then
Title:  commanding an American sloop-of-war of the first class, happened to
Title:  be dining with a party of whaling captains, on board a Nantucket ship
Title:  in the harbor of Oahu, Sandwich Islands.  Conversation turning upon
Title:  whales, the Commodore was pleased to be sceptical touching the
Title:  amazing strength ascribed to them by the professional gentlemen
Title:  present.  He peremptorily denied for example, that any whale could so
Title:  smite his stout sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a
Title:  thimbleful.  Very good; but there is more coming.  Some weeks after,
Title:  the Commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for Valparaiso.  But
Title:  he was stopped on the way by a portly sperm whale, that begged a few
Title:  moments' confidential business with him.  That business consisted in
Title:  fetching the Commodore's craft such a thwack, that with all his pumps
Title:  going he made straight for the nearest port to heave down and repair.
Title:  I am not superstitious, but I consider the Commodore's interview
Title:  with that whale as providential.  Was not Saul of Tarsus converted
Title:  from unbelief by a similar fright?  I tell you, the sperm whale will
Title:  stand no nonsense.
Title:  
Title:  I will now refer you to Langsdorff's Voyages for a little
Title:  circumstance in point, peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof.
Title:  Langsdorff, you must know by the way, was attached to the Russian
Title:  Admiral Krusenstern's famous Discovery Expedition in the beginning of
Title:  the present century.  Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth
Title:  chapter:
Title:  
Title:  "By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail, and the next
Title:  day we were out in the open sea, on our way to Ochotsh.  The weather
Title:  was very clear and fine, but so intolerably cold that we were obliged
Title:  to keep on our fur clothing.  For some days we had very little wind;
Title:  it was not till the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the northwest
Title:  sprang up.  An uncommon large whale, the body of which was larger
Title:  than the ship itself, lay almost at the surface of the water, but was
Title:  not perceived by any one on board till the moment when the ship,
Title:  which was in full sail, was almost upon him, so that it was
Title:  impossible to prevent its striking against him.  We were thus placed
Title:  in the most imminent danger, as this gigantic creature, setting up
Title:  its back, raised the ship three feet at least out of the water.  The
Title:  masts reeled, and the sails fell altogether, while we who were below
Title:  all sprang instantly upon the deck, concluding that we had struck
Title:  upon some rock; instead of this we saw the monster sailing off with
Title:  the utmost gravity and solemnity.  Captain D'Wolf applied immediately
Title:  to the pumps to examine whether or not the vessel had received any
Title:  damage from the shock, but we found that very happily it had escaped
Title:  entirely uninjured."
Title:  
Title:  Now, the Captain D'Wolf here alluded to as commanding the ship in
Title:  question, is a New Englander, who, after a long life of unusual
Title:  adventures as a sea-captain, this day resides in the village of
Title:  Dorchester near Boston.  I have the honour of being a nephew of his.
Title:  I have particularly questioned him concerning this passage in
Title:  Langsdorff.  He substantiates every word.  The ship, however, was by
Title:  no means a large one: a Russian craft built on the Siberian coast,
Title:  and purchased by my uncle after bartering away the vessel in which he
Title:  sailed from home.
Title:  
Title:  In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned adventure, so full,
Title:  too, of honest wonders--the voyage of Lionel Wafer, one of ancient
Title:  Dampier's old chums--I found a little matter set down so like that
Title:  just quoted from Langsdorff, that I cannot forbear inserting it here
Title:  for a corroborative example, if such be needed.
Title:  
Title:  Lionel, it seems, was on his way to "John Ferdinando," as he calls
Title:  the modern Juan Fernandes.  "In our way thither," he says, "about
Title:  four o'clock in the morning, when we were about one hundred and fifty
Title:  leagues from the Main of America, our ship felt a terrible shock,
Title:  which put our men in such consternation that they could hardly tell
Title:  where they were or what to think; but every one began to prepare for
Title:  death.  And, indeed, the shock was so sudden and violent, that we
Title:  took it for granted the ship had struck against a rock; but when the
Title:  amazement was a little over, we cast the lead, and sounded, but found
Title:  no ground.  ....  The suddenness of the shock made the guns leap in
Title:  their carriages, and several of the men were shaken out of their
Title:  hammocks.  Captain Davis, who lay with his head on a gun, was thrown
Title:  out of his cabin!"  Lionel then goes on to impute the shock to an
Title:  earthquake, and seems to substantiate the imputation by stating that
Title:  a great earthquake, somewhere about that time, did actually do great
Title:  mischief along the Spanish land.  But I should not much wonder if, in
Title:  the darkness of that early hour of the morning, the shock was after
Title:  all caused by an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull from
Title:  beneath.
Title:  
Title:  I might proceed with several more examples, one way or another known
Title:  to me, of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale.  In
Title:  more than one instance, he has been known, not only to chase the
Title:  assailing boats back to their ships, but to pursue the ship itself,
Title:  and long withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks.  The
Title:  English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head; and, as for
Title:  his strength, let me say, that there have been examples where the
Title:  lines attached to a running sperm whale have, in a calm, been
Title:  transferred to the ship, and secured there; the whale towing her
Title:  great hull through the water, as a horse walks off with a cart.
Title:  Again, it is very often observed that, if the sperm whale, once
Title:  struck, is allowed time to rally, he then acts, not so often with
Title:  blind rage, as with wilful, deliberate designs of destruction to his
Title:  pursuers; nor is it without conveying some eloquent indication of his
Title:  character, that upon being attacked he will frequently open his
Title:  mouth, and retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutive
Title:  minutes.  But I must be content with only one more and a concluding
Title:  illustration; a remarkable and most significant one, by which you
Title:  will not fail to see, that not only is the most marvellous event in
Title:  this book corroborated by plain facts of the present day, but that
Title:  these marvels (like all marvels) are mere repetitions of the ages; so
Title:  that for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon--Verily there is
Title:  nothing new under the sun.
Title:  
Title:  In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius, a Christian
Title:  magistrate of Constantinople, in the days when Justinian was Emperor
Title:  and Belisarius general.  As many know, he wrote the history of his
Title:  own times, a work every way of uncommon value.  By the best
Title:  authorities, he has always been considered a most trustworthy and
Title:  unexaggerating historian, except in some one or two particulars, not
Title:  at all affecting the matter presently to be mentioned.
Title:  
Title:  Now, in this history of his, Procopius mentions that, during the term
Title:  of his prefecture at Constantinople, a great sea-monster was captured
Title:  in the neighboring Propontis, or Sea of Marmora, after having
Title:  destroyed vessels at intervals in those waters for a period of more
Title:  than fifty years.  A fact thus set down in substantial history cannot
Title:  easily be gainsaid.  Nor is there any reason it should be.  Of what
Title:  precise species this sea-monster was, is not mentioned.  But as he
Title:  destroyed ships, as well as for other reasons, he must have been a
Title:  whale; and I am strongly inclined to think a sperm whale.  And I will
Title:  tell you why.  For a long time I fancied that the sperm whale had
Title:  been always unknown in the Mediterranean and the deep waters
Title:  connecting with it.  Even now I am certain that those seas are not,
Title:  and perhaps never can be, in the present constitution of things, a
Title:  place for his habitual gregarious resort.  But further investigations
Title:  have recently proved to me, that in modern times there have been
Title:  isolated instances of the presence of the sperm whale in the
Title:  Mediterranean.  I am told, on good authority, that on the Barbary
Title:  coast, a Commodore Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of a
Title:  sperm whale.  Now, as a vessel of war readily passes through the
Title:  Dardanelles, hence a sperm whale could, by the same route, pass out
Title:  of the Mediterranean into the Propontis.
Title:  
Title:  In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that peculiar
Title:  substance called BRIT is to be found, the aliment of the right whale.
Title:  But I have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm
Title:  whale--squid or cuttle-fish--lurks at the bottom of that sea, because
Title:  large creatures, but by no means the largest of that sort, have been
Title:  found at its surface.  If, then, you properly put these statements
Title:  together, and reason upon them a bit, you will clearly perceive that,
Title:  according to all human reasoning, Procopius's sea-monster, that for
Title:  half a century stove the ships of a Roman Emperor, must in all
Title:  probability have been a sperm whale.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 46
Title:  
Title:  Surmises.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Though, consumed with the hot fire of his purpose, Ahab in all his
Title:  thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of Moby
Title:  Dick; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to
Title:  that one passion; nevertheless it may have been that he was by nature
Title:  and long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman's ways,
Title:  altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage.  Or
Title:  at least if this were otherwise, there were not wanting other motives
Title:  much more influential with him.  It would be refining too much,
Title:  perhaps, even considering his monomania, to hint that his
Title:  vindictiveness towards the White Whale might have possibly extended
Title:  itself in some degree to all sperm whales, and that the more monsters
Title:  he slew by so much the more he multiplied the chances that each
Title:  subsequently encountered whale would prove to be the hated one he
Title:  hunted.  But if such an hypothesis be indeed exceptionable, there
Title:  were still additional considerations which, though not so strictly
Title:  according with the wildness of his ruling passion, yet were by no
Title:  means incapable of swaying him.
Title:  
Title:  To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools; and of all tools used
Title:  in the shadow of the moon, men are most apt to get out of order.  He
Title:  knew, for example, that however magnetic his ascendency in some
Title:  respects was over Starbuck, yet that ascendency did not cover the
Title:  complete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal superiority
Title:  involves intellectual mastership; for to the purely spiritual, the
Title:  intellectual but stand in a sort of corporeal relation.  Starbuck's
Title:  body and Starbuck's coerced will were Ahab's, so long as Ahab kept
Title:  his magnet at Starbuck's brain; still he knew that for all this the
Title:  chief mate, in his soul, abhorred his captain's quest, and could he,
Title:  would joyfully disintegrate himself from it, or even frustrate it.
Title:  It might be that a long interval would elapse ere the White Whale was
Title:  seen.  During that long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to fall
Title:  into open relapses of rebellion against his captain's leadership,
Title:  unless some ordinary, prudential, circumstantial influences were
Title:  brought to bear upon him.  Not only that, but the subtle insanity of
Title:  Ahab respecting Moby Dick was noways more significantly manifested
Title:  than in his superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing that, for
Title:  the present, the hunt should in some way be stripped of that strange
Title:  imaginative impiousness which naturally invested it; that the full
Title:  terror of the voyage must be kept withdrawn into the obscure
Title:  background (for few men's courage is proof against protracted
Title:  meditation unrelieved by action); that when they stood their long
Title:  night watches, his officers and men must have some nearer things to
Title:  think of than Moby Dick.  For however eagerly and impetuously the
Title:  savage crew had hailed the announcement of his quest; yet all sailors
Title:  of all sorts are more or less capricious and unreliable--they live in
Title:  the varying outer weather, and they inhale its fickleness--and when
Title:  retained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit, however
Title:  promissory of life and passion in the end, it is above all things
Title:  requisite that temporary interests and employments should intervene
Title:  and hold them healthily suspended for the final dash.
Title:  
Title:  Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing.  In times of strong emotion
Title:  mankind disdain all base considerations; but such times are
Title:  evanescent.  The permanent constitutional condition of the
Title:  manufactured man, thought Ahab, is sordidness.  Granting that the
Title:  White Whale fully incites the hearts of this my savage crew, and
Title:  playing round their savageness even breeds a certain generous
Title:  knight-errantism in them, still, while for the love of it they give
Title:  chase to Moby Dick, they must also have food for their more common,
Title:  daily appetites.  For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of
Title:  old times were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land to
Title:  fight for their holy sepulchre, without committing burglaries,
Title:  picking pockets, and gaining other pious perquisites by the way.  Had
Title:  they been strictly held to their one final and romantic object--that
Title:  final and romantic object, too many would have turned from in
Title:  disgust.  I will not strip these men, thought Ahab, of all hopes of
Title:  cash--aye, cash.  They may scorn cash now; but let some months go by,
Title:  and no perspective promise of it to them, and then this same
Title:  quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them, this same cash would
Title:  soon cashier Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more related
Title:  to Ahab personally.  Having impulsively, it is probable, and perhaps
Title:  somewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of the
Title:  Pequod's voyage, Ahab was now entirely conscious that, in so doing,
Title:  he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge of
Title:  usurpation; and with perfect impunity, both moral and legal, his crew
Title:  if so disposed, and to that end competent, could refuse all further
Title:  obedience to him, and even violently wrest from him the command.
Title:  From even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation, and the
Title:  possible consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground,
Title:  Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself.  That
Title:  protection could only consist in his own predominating brain and
Title:  heart and hand, backed by a heedful, closely calculating attention to
Title:  every minute atmospheric influence which it was possible for his crew
Title:  to be subjected to.
Title:  
Title:  For all these reasons then, and others perhaps too analytic to be
Title:  verbally developed here, Ahab plainly saw that he must still in a
Title:  good degree continue true to the natural, nominal purpose of the
Title:  Pequod's voyage; observe all customary usages; and not only that, but
Title:  force himself to evince all his well known passionate interest in the
Title:  general pursuit of his profession.
Title:  
Title:  Be all this as it may, his voice was now often heard hailing the
Title:  three mast-heads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out, and
Title:  not omit reporting even a porpoise.  This vigilance was not long
Title:  without reward.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 47
Title:  
Title:  The Mat-Maker.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was a cloudy, sultry afternoon; the seamen were lazily lounging
Title:  about the decks, or vacantly gazing over into the lead-coloured
Title:  waters.  Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving what is called a
Title:  sword-mat, for an additional lashing to our boat.  So still and
Title:  subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene, and such an
Title:  incantation of reverie lurked in the air, that each silent sailor
Title:  seemed resolved into his own invisible self.
Title:  
Title:  I was the attendant or page of Queequeg, while busy at the mat.  As I
Title:  kept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline between the
Title:  long yarns of the warp, using my own hand for the shuttle, and as
Title:  Queequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon slid his heavy oaken sword
Title:  between the threads, and idly looking off upon the water, carelessly
Title:  and unthinkingly drove home every yarn: I say so strange a
Title:  dreaminess did there then reign all over the ship and all over the
Title:  sea, only broken by the intermitting dull sound of the sword, that it
Title:  seemed as if this were the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttle
Title:  mechanically weaving and weaving away at the Fates.  There lay the
Title:  fixed threads of the warp subject to but one single, ever returning,
Title:  unchanging vibration, and that vibration merely enough to admit of
Title:  the crosswise interblending of other threads with its own.  This warp
Title:  seemed necessity; and here, thought I, with my own hand I ply my own
Title:  shuttle and weave my own destiny into these unalterable threads.
Title:  Meantime, Queequeg's impulsive, indifferent sword, sometimes hitting
Title:  the woof slantingly, or crookedly, or strongly, or weakly, as the
Title:  case might be; and by this difference in the concluding blow
Title:  producing a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the
Title:  completed fabric; this savage's sword, thought I, which thus finally
Title:  shapes and fashions both warp and woof; this easy, indifferent sword
Title:  must be chance--aye, chance, free will, and necessity--nowise
Title:  incompatible--all interweavingly working together.  The straight warp
Title:  of necessity, not to be swerved from its ultimate course--its every
Title:  alternating vibration, indeed, only tending to that; free will still
Title:  free to ply her shuttle between given threads; and chance, though
Title:  restrained in its play within the right lines of necessity, and
Title:  sideways in its motions directed by free will, though thus prescribed
Title:  to by both, chance by turns rules either, and has the last featuring
Title:  blow at events.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I started at a sound so
Title:  strange, long drawn, and musically wild and unearthly, that the ball
Title:  of free will dropped from my hand, and I stood gazing up at the
Title:  clouds whence that voice dropped like a wing.  High aloft in the
Title:  cross-trees was that mad Gay-Header, Tashtego.  His body was reaching
Title:  eagerly forward, his hand stretched out like a wand, and at brief
Title:  sudden intervals he continued his cries.  To be sure the same sound
Title:  was that very moment perhaps being heard all over the seas, from
Title:  hundreds of whalemen's look-outs perched as high in the air; but from
Title:  few of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have derived such a
Title:  marvellous cadence as from Tashtego the Indian's.
Title:  
Title:  As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air, so wildly and
Title:  eagerly peering towards the horizon, you would have thought him some
Title:  prophet or seer beholding the shadows of Fate, and by those wild
Title:  cries announcing their coming.
Title:  
Title:  "There she blows! there! there! there! she blows! she blows!"
Title:  
Title:  "Where-away?"
Title:  
Title:  "On the lee-beam, about two miles off! a school of them!"
Title:  
Title:  Instantly all was commotion.
Title:  
Title:  The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks, with the same undeviating and
Title:  reliable uniformity.  And thereby whalemen distinguish this fish from
Title:  other tribes of his genus.
Title:  
Title:  "There go flukes!" was now the cry from Tashtego; and the whales
Title:  disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  "Quick, steward!" cried Ahab.  "Time! time!"
Title:  
Title:  Dough-Boy hurried below, glanced at the watch, and reported the exact
Title:  minute to Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  The ship was now kept away from the wind, and she went gently rolling
Title:  before it.  Tashtego reporting that the whales had gone down heading
Title:  to leeward, we confidently looked to see them again directly in
Title:  advance of our bows.  For that singular craft at times evinced by the
Title:  Sperm Whale when, sounding with his head in one direction, he
Title:  nevertheless, while concealed beneath the surface, mills round, and
Title:  swiftly swims off in the opposite quarter--this deceitfulness of his
Title:  could not now be in action; for there was no reason to suppose that
Title:  the fish seen by Tashtego had been in any way alarmed, or indeed knew
Title:  at all of our vicinity.  One of the men selected for
Title:  shipkeepers--that is, those not appointed to the boats, by this time
Title:  relieved the Indian at the main-mast head.  The sailors at the fore
Title:  and mizzen had come down; the line tubs were fixed in their places;
Title:  the cranes were thrust out; the mainyard was backed, and the three
Title:  boats swung over the sea like three samphire baskets over high
Title:  cliffs.  Outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with one hand
Title:  clung to the rail, while one foot was expectantly poised on the
Title:  gunwale.  So look the long line of man-of-war's men about to throw
Title:  themselves on board an enemy's ship.
Title:  
Title:  But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that took
Title:  every eye from the whale.  With a start all glared at dark Ahab, who
Title:  was surrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of
Title:  air.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 48
Title:  
Title:  The First Lowering.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The phantoms, for so they then seemed, were flitting on the other
Title:  side of the deck, and, with a noiseless celerity, were casting loose
Title:  the tackles and bands of the boat which swung there.  This boat had
Title:  always been deemed one of the spare boats, though technically called
Title:  the captain's, on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter.
Title:  The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart, with one
Title:  white tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips.  A rumpled
Title:  Chinese jacket of black cotton funereally invested him, with wide
Title:  black trowsers of the same dark stuff.  But strangely crowning this
Title:  ebonness was a glistening white plaited turban, the living hair
Title:  braided and coiled round and round upon his head.  Less swart in
Title:  aspect, the companions of this figure were of that vivid,
Title:  tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal natives of
Title:  the Manillas;--a race notorious for a certain diabolism of subtilty,
Title:  and by some honest white mariners supposed to be the paid spies and
Title:  secret confidential agents on the water of the devil, their lord,
Title:  whose counting-room they suppose to be elsewhere.
Title:  
Title:  While yet the wondering ship's company were gazing upon these
Title:  strangers, Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their
Title:  head, "All ready there, Fedallah?"
Title:  
Title:  "Ready," was the half-hissed reply.
Title:  
Title:  "Lower away then; d'ye hear?" shouting across the deck.  "Lower away
Title:  there, I say."
Title:  
Title:  Such was the thunder of his voice, that spite of their amazement the
Title:  men sprang over the rail; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks;
Title:  with a wallow, the three boats dropped into the sea; while, with a
Title:  dexterous, off-handed daring, unknown in any other vocation, the
Title:  sailors, goat-like, leaped down the rolling ship's side into the
Title:  tossed boats below.
Title:  
Title:  Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship's lee, when a fourth
Title:  keel, coming from the windward side, pulled round under the stern,
Title:  and showed the five strangers rowing Ahab, who, standing erect in the
Title:  stern, loudly hailed Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask, to spread themselves
Title:  widely, so as to cover a large expanse of water.  But with all their
Title:  eyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and his crew, the inmates
Title:  of the other boats obeyed not the command.
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Ahab?--" said Starbuck.
Title:  
Title:  "Spread yourselves," cried Ahab; "give way, all four boats.  Thou,
Title:  Flask, pull out more to leeward!"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, sir," cheerily cried little King-Post, sweeping round his
Title:  great steering oar.  "Lay back!" addressing his crew.
Title:  "There!--there!--there again!  There she blows right ahead,
Title:  boys!--lay back!"
Title:  
Title:  "Never heed yonder yellow boys, Archy."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I don't mind'em, sir," said Archy; "I knew it all before now.
Title:  Didn't I hear 'em in the hold?  And didn't I tell Cabaco here of it?
Title:  What say ye, Cabaco?  They are stowaways, Mr. Flask."
Title:  
Title:  "Pull, pull, my fine hearts-alive; pull, my children; pull, my little
Title:  ones," drawlingly and soothingly sighed Stubb to his crew, some of
Title:  whom still showed signs of uneasiness.  "Why don't you break your
Title:  backbones, my boys?  What is it you stare at?  Those chaps in yonder
Title:  boat?  Tut!  They are only five more hands come to help us--never
Title:  mind from where--the more the merrier.  Pull, then, do pull; never
Title:  mind the brimstone--devils are good fellows enough.  So, so; there
Title:  you are now; that's the stroke for a thousand pounds; that's the
Title:  stroke to sweep the stakes!  Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil, my
Title:  heroes!  Three cheers, men--all hearts alive!  Easy, easy; don't be
Title:  in a hurry--don't be in a hurry.  Why don't you snap your oars, you
Title:  rascals?  Bite something, you dogs!  So, so, so, then:--softly,
Title:  softly!  That's it--that's it! long and strong.  Give way there, give
Title:  way!  The devil fetch ye, ye ragamuffin rapscallions; ye are all
Title:  asleep.  Stop snoring, ye sleepers, and pull.  Pull, will ye? pull,
Title:  can't ye? pull, won't ye?  Why in the name of gudgeons and
Title:  ginger-cakes don't ye pull?--pull and break something! pull, and
Title:  start your eyes out!  Here!" whipping out the sharp knife from his
Title:  girdle; "every mother's son of ye draw his knife, and pull with the
Title:  blade between his teeth.  That's it--that's it.  Now ye do something;
Title:  that looks like it, my steel-bits.  Start her--start her, my
Title:  silver-spoons!  Start her, marling-spikes!"
Title:  
Title:  Stubb's exordium to his crew is given here at large, because he had
Title:  rather a peculiar way of talking to them in general, and especially
Title:  in inculcating the religion of rowing.  But you must not suppose from
Title:  this specimen of his sermonizings that he ever flew into downright
Title:  passions with his congregation.  Not at all; and therein consisted
Title:  his chief peculiarity.  He would say the most terrific things to his
Title:  crew, in a tone so strangely compounded of fun and fury, and the fury
Title:  seemed so calculated merely as a spice to the fun, that no oarsman
Title:  could hear such queer invocations without pulling for dear life, and
Title:  yet pulling for the mere joke of the thing.  Besides he all the time
Title:  looked so easy and indolent himself, so loungingly managed his
Title:  steering-oar, and so broadly gaped--open-mouthed at times--that the
Title:  mere sight of such a yawning commander, by sheer force of contrast,
Title:  acted like a charm upon the crew.  Then again, Stubb was one of those
Title:  odd sort of humorists, whose jollity is sometimes so curiously
Title:  ambiguous, as to put all inferiors on their guard in the matter of
Title:  obeying them.
Title:  
Title:  In obedience to a sign from Ahab, Starbuck was now pulling obliquely
Title:  across Stubb's bow; and when for a minute or so the two boats were
Title:  pretty near to each other, Stubb hailed the mate.
Title:  
Title:  "Mr. Starbuck! larboard boat there, ahoy! a word with ye, sir, if ye
Title:  please!"
Title:  
Title:  "Halloa!" returned Starbuck, turning round not a single inch as he
Title:  spoke; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew; his face set
Title:  like a flint from Stubb's.
Title:  
Title:  "What think ye of those yellow boys, sir!
Title:  
Title:  "Smuggled on board, somehow, before the ship sailed. (Strong, strong,
Title:  boys!)" in a whisper to his crew, then speaking out loud again: "A
Title:  sad business, Mr. Stubb! (seethe her, seethe her, my lads!) but never
Title:  mind, Mr. Stubb, all for the best.  Let all your crew pull strong,
Title:  come what will. (Spring, my men, spring!) There's hogsheads of sperm
Title:  ahead, Mr. Stubb, and that's what ye came for. (Pull, my boys!)
Title:  Sperm, sperm's the play!  This at least is duty; duty and profit hand
Title:  in hand."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, I thought as much," soliloquized Stubb, when the boats
Title:  diverged, "as soon as I clapt eye on 'em, I thought so.  Aye, and
Title:  that's what he went into the after hold for, so often, as Dough-Boy
Title:  long suspected.  They were hidden down there.  The White Whale's at
Title:  the bottom of it.  Well, well, so be it!  Can't be helped!  All
Title:  right!  Give way, men!  It ain't the White Whale to-day!  Give way!"
Title:  
Title:  Now the advent of these outlandish strangers at such a critical
Title:  instant as the lowering of the boats from the deck, this had not
Title:  unreasonably awakened a sort of superstitious amazement in some of
Title:  the ship's company; but Archy's fancied discovery having some time
Title:  previous got abroad among them, though indeed not credited then, this
Title:  had in some small measure prepared them for the event.  It took off
Title:  the extreme edge of their wonder; and so what with all this and
Title:  Stubb's confident way of accounting for their appearance, they were
Title:  for the time freed from superstitious surmisings; though the affair
Title:  still left abundant room for all manner of wild conjectures as to
Title:  dark Ahab's precise agency in the matter from the beginning.  For me,
Title:  I silently recalled the mysterious shadows I had seen creeping on
Title:  board the Pequod during the dim Nantucket dawn, as well as the
Title:  enigmatical hintings of the unaccountable Elijah.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, Ahab, out of hearing of his officers, having sided the
Title:  furthest to windward, was still ranging ahead of the other boats; a
Title:  circumstance bespeaking how potent a crew was pulling him.  Those
Title:  tiger yellow creatures of his seemed all steel and whalebone; like
Title:  five trip-hammers they rose and fell with regular strokes of
Title:  strength, which periodically started the boat along the water like a
Title:  horizontal burst boiler out of a Mississippi steamer.  As for
Title:  Fedallah, who was seen pulling the harpooneer oar, he had thrown
Title:  aside his black jacket, and displayed his naked chest with the whole
Title:  part of his body above the gunwale, clearly cut against the
Title:  alternating depressions of the watery horizon; while at the other end
Title:  of the boat Ahab, with one arm, like a fencer's, thrown half backward
Title:  into the air, as if to counterbalance any tendency to trip; Ahab was
Title:  seen steadily managing his steering oar as in a thousand boat
Title:  lowerings ere the White Whale had torn him.  All at once the
Title:  outstretched arm gave a peculiar motion and then remained fixed,
Title:  while the boat's five oars were seen simultaneously peaked.  Boat and
Title:  crew sat motionless on the sea.  Instantly the three spread boats in
Title:  the rear paused on their way.  The whales had irregularly settled
Title:  bodily down into the blue, thus giving no distantly discernible token
Title:  of the movement, though from his closer vicinity Ahab had observed
Title:  it.
Title:  
Title:  "Every man look out along his oars!" cried Starbuck.  "Thou,
Title:  Queequeg, stand up!"
Title:  
Title:  Nimbly springing up on the triangular raised box in the bow, the
Title:  savage stood erect there, and with intensely eager eyes gazed off
Title:  towards the spot where the chase had last been descried.  Likewise
Title:  upon the extreme stern of the boat where it was also triangularly
Title:  platformed level with the gunwale, Starbuck himself was seen coolly
Title:  and adroitly balancing himself to the jerking tossings of his chip of
Title:  a craft, and silently eyeing the vast blue eye of the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Not very far distant Flask's boat was also lying breathlessly still;
Title:  its commander recklessly standing upon the top of the loggerhead, a
Title:  stout sort of post rooted in the keel, and rising some two feet above
Title:  the level of the stern platform.  It is used for catching turns with
Title:  the whale line.  Its top is not more spacious than the palm of a
Title:  man's hand, and standing upon such a base as that, Flask seemed
Title:  perched at the mast-head of some ship which had sunk to all but her
Title:  trucks.  But little King-Post was small and short, and at the same
Title:  time little King-Post was full of a large and tall ambition, so that
Title:  this loggerhead stand-point of his did by no means satisfy King-Post.
Title:  
Title:  "I can't see three seas off; tip us up an oar there, and let me on to
Title:  that."
Title:  
Title:  Upon this, Daggoo, with either hand upon the gunwale to steady his
Title:  way, swiftly slid aft, and then erecting himself volunteered his
Title:  lofty shoulders for a pedestal.
Title:  
Title:  "Good a mast-head as any, sir.  Will you mount?"
Title:  
Title:  "That I will, and thank ye very much, my fine fellow; only I wish you
Title:  fifty feet taller."
Title:  
Title:  Whereupon planting his feet firmly against two opposite planks of the
Title:  boat, the gigantic negro, stooping a little, presented his flat palm
Title:  to Flask's foot, and then putting Flask's hand on his hearse-plumed
Title:  head and bidding him spring as he himself should toss, with one
Title:  dexterous fling landed the little man high and dry on his shoulders.
Title:  And here was Flask now standing, Daggoo with one lifted arm
Title:  furnishing him with a breastband to lean against and steady himself
Title:  by.
Title:  
Title:  At any time it is a strange sight to the tyro to see with what
Title:  wondrous habitude of unconscious skill the whaleman will maintain an
Title:  erect posture in his boat, even when pitched about by the most
Title:  riotously perverse and cross-running seas.  Still more strange to see
Title:  him giddily perched upon the loggerhead itself, under such
Title:  circumstances.  But the sight of little Flask mounted upon gigantic
Title:  Daggoo was yet more curious; for sustaining himself with a cool,
Title:  indifferent, easy, unthought of, barbaric majesty, the noble negro to
Title:  every roll of the sea harmoniously rolled his fine form.  On his
Title:  broad back, flaxen-haired Flask seemed a snow-flake.  The bearer
Title:  looked nobler than the rider.  Though truly vivacious, tumultuous,
Title:  ostentatious little Flask would now and then stamp with impatience;
Title:  but not one added heave did he thereby give to the negro's lordly
Title:  chest.  So have I seen Passion and Vanity stamping the living
Title:  magnanimous earth, but the earth did not alter her tides and her
Title:  seasons for that.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile Stubb, the third mate, betrayed no such far-gazing
Title:  solicitudes.  The whales might have made one of their regular
Title:  soundings, not a temporary dive from mere fright; and if that were
Title:  the case, Stubb, as his wont in such cases, it seems, was resolved to
Title:  solace the languishing interval with his pipe.  He withdrew it from
Title:  his hatband, where he always wore it aslant like a feather.  He
Title:  loaded it, and rammed home the loading with his thumb-end; but hardly
Title:  had he ignited his match across the rough sandpaper of his hand,
Title:  when Tashtego, his harpooneer, whose eyes had been setting to
Title:  windward like two fixed stars, suddenly dropped like light from his
Title:  erect attitude to his seat, crying out in a quick phrensy of hurry,
Title:  "Down, down all, and give way!--there they are!"
Title:  
Title:  To a landsman, no whale, nor any sign of a herring, would have been
Title:  visible at that moment; nothing but a troubled bit of greenish white
Title:  water, and thin scattered puffs of vapour hovering over it, and
Title:  suffusingly blowing off to leeward, like the confused scud from white
Title:  rolling billows.  The air around suddenly vibrated and tingled, as it
Title:  were, like the air over intensely heated plates of iron.  Beneath
Title:  this atmospheric waving and curling, and partially beneath a thin
Title:  layer of water, also, the whales were swimming.  Seen in advance of
Title:  all the other indications, the puffs of vapour they spouted, seemed
Title:  their forerunning couriers and detached flying outriders.
Title:  
Title:  All four boats were now in keen pursuit of that one spot of troubled
Title:  water and air.  But it bade fair to outstrip them; it flew on and on,
Title:  as a mass of interblending bubbles borne down a rapid stream from the
Title:  hills.
Title:  
Title:  "Pull, pull, my good boys," said Starbuck, in the lowest possible but
Title:  intensest concentrated whisper to his men; while the sharp fixed
Title:  glance from his eyes darted straight ahead of the bow, almost seemed
Title:  as two visible needles in two unerring binnacle compasses.  He did
Title:  not say much to his crew, though, nor did his crew say anything to
Title:  him.  Only the silence of the boat was at intervals startlingly
Title:  pierced by one of his peculiar whispers, now harsh with command, now
Title:  soft with entreaty.
Title:  
Title:  How different the loud little King-Post.  "Sing out and say
Title:  something, my hearties.  Roar and pull, my thunderbolts!  Beach me,
Title:  beach me on their black backs, boys; only do that for me, and I'll
Title:  sign over to you my Martha's Vineyard plantation, boys; including
Title:  wife and children, boys.  Lay me on--lay me on!  O Lord, Lord! but I
Title:  shall go stark, staring mad!  See! see that white water!"  And so
Title:  shouting, he pulled his hat from his head, and stamped up and down on
Title:  it; then picking it up, flirted it far off upon the sea; and finally
Title:  fell to rearing and plunging in the boat's stern like a crazed colt
Title:  from the prairie.
Title:  
Title:  "Look at that chap now," philosophically drawled Stubb, who, with his
Title:  unlighted short pipe, mechanically retained between his teeth, at a
Title:  short distance, followed after--"He's got fits, that Flask has.
Title:  Fits? yes, give him fits--that's the very word--pitch fits into 'em.
Title:  Merrily, merrily, hearts-alive.  Pudding for supper, you
Title:  know;--merry's the word.  Pull, babes--pull, sucklings--pull, all.
Title:  But what the devil are you hurrying about?  Softly, softly, and
Title:  steadily, my men.  Only pull, and keep pulling; nothing more.  Crack
Title:  all your backbones, and bite your knives in two--that's all.  Take it
Title:  easy--why don't ye take it easy, I say, and burst all your livers and
Title:  lungs!"
Title:  
Title:  But what it was that inscrutable Ahab said to that tiger-yellow crew
Title:  of his--these were words best omitted here; for you live under the
Title:  blessed light of the evangelical land.  Only the infidel sharks in
Title:  the audacious seas may give ear to such words, when, with tornado
Title:  brow, and eyes of red murder, and foam-glued lips, Ahab leaped after
Title:  his prey.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, all the boats tore on.  The repeated specific allusions of
Title:  Flask to "that whale," as he called the fictitious monster which he
Title:  declared to be incessantly tantalizing his boat's bow with its
Title:  tail--these allusions of his were at times so vivid and life-like,
Title:  that they would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fearful
Title:  look over the shoulder.  But this was against all rule; for the
Title:  oarsmen must put out their eyes, and ram a skewer through their
Title:  necks; usage pronouncing that they must have no organs but ears, and
Title:  no limbs but arms, in these critical moments.
Title:  
Title:  It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe!  The vast swells of the
Title:  omnipotent sea; the surging, hollow roar they made, as they rolled
Title:  along the eight gunwales, like gigantic bowls in a boundless
Title:  bowling-green; the brief suspended agony of the boat, as it would tip
Title:  for an instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves, that
Title:  almost seemed threatening to cut it in two; the sudden profound dip
Title:  into the watery glens and hollows; the keen spurrings and goadings to
Title:  gain the top of the opposite hill; the headlong, sled-like slide down
Title:  its other side;--all these, with the cries of the headsmen and
Title:  harpooneers, and the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen, with the
Title:  wondrous sight of the ivory Pequod bearing down upon her boats with
Title:  outstretched sails, like a wild hen after her screaming brood;--all
Title:  this was thrilling.
Title:  
Title:  Not the raw recruit, marching from the bosom of his wife into the
Title:  fever heat of his first battle; not the dead man's ghost encountering
Title:  the first unknown phantom in the other world;--neither of these can
Title:  feel stranger and stronger emotions than that man does, who for the
Title:  first time finds himself pulling into the charmed, churned circle of
Title:  the hunted sperm whale.
Title:  
Title:  The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more and
Title:  more visible, owing to the increasing darkness of the dun
Title:  cloud-shadows flung upon the sea.  The jets of vapour no longer
Title:  blended, but tilted everywhere to right and left; the whales seemed
Title:  separating their wakes.  The boats were pulled more apart; Starbuck
Title:  giving chase to three whales running dead to leeward.  Our sail was
Title:  now set, and, with the still rising wind, we rushed along; the boat
Title:  going with such madness through the water, that the lee oars could
Title:  scarcely be worked rapidly enough to escape being torn from the
Title:  row-locks.
Title:  
Title:  Soon we were running through a suffusing wide veil of mist; neither
Title:  ship nor boat to be seen.
Title:  
Title:  "Give way, men," whispered Starbuck, drawing still further aft the
Title:  sheet of his sail; "there is time to kill a fish yet before the
Title:  squall comes.  There's white water again!--close to!  Spring!"
Title:  
Title:  Soon after, two cries in quick succession on each side of us denoted
Title:  that the other boats had got fast; but hardly were they overheard,
Title:  when with a lightning-like hurtling whisper Starbuck said: "Stand
Title:  up!" and Queequeg, harpoon in hand, sprang to his feet.
Title:  
Title:  Though not one of the oarsmen was then facing the life and death
Title:  peril so close to them ahead, yet with their eyes on the intense
Title:  countenance of the mate in the stern of the boat, they knew that the
Title:  imminent instant had come; they heard, too, an enormous wallowing
Title:  sound as of fifty elephants stirring in their litter.  Meanwhile the
Title:  boat was still booming through the mist, the waves curling and
Title:  hissing around us like the erected crests of enraged serpents.
Title:  
Title:  "That's his hump.  THERE, THERE, give it to him!" whispered Starbuck.
Title:  
Title:  A short rushing sound leaped out of the boat; it was the darted iron
Title:  of Queequeg.  Then all in one welded commotion came an invisible push
Title:  from astern, while forward the boat seemed striking on a ledge; the
Title:  sail collapsed and exploded; a gush of scalding vapour shot up near
Title:  by; something rolled and tumbled like an earthquake beneath us.  The
Title:  whole crew were half suffocated as they were tossed helter-skelter
Title:  into the white curdling cream of the squall.  Squall, whale, and
Title:  harpoon had all blended together; and the whale, merely grazed by the
Title:  iron, escaped.
Title:  
Title:  Though completely swamped, the boat was nearly unharmed.  Swimming
Title:  round it we picked up the floating oars, and lashing them across the
Title:  gunwale, tumbled back to our places.  There we sat up to our knees in
Title:  the sea, the water covering every rib and plank, so that to our
Title:  downward gazing eyes the suspended craft seemed a coral boat grown up
Title:  to us from the bottom of the ocean.
Title:  
Title:  The wind increased to a howl; the waves dashed their bucklers
Title:  together; the whole squall roared, forked, and crackled around us
Title:  like a white fire upon the prairie, in which, unconsumed, we were
Title:  burning; immortal in these jaws of death!  In vain we hailed the
Title:  other boats; as well roar to the live coals down the chimney of a
Title:  flaming furnace as hail those boats in that storm.  Meanwhile the
Title:  driving scud, rack, and mist, grew darker with the shadows of night;
Title:  no sign of the ship could be seen.  The rising sea forbade all
Title:  attempts to bale out the boat.  The oars were useless as propellers,
Title:  performing now the office of life-preservers.  So, cutting the
Title:  lashing of the waterproof match keg, after many failures Starbuck
Title:  contrived to ignite the lamp in the lantern; then stretching it on a
Title:  waif pole, handed it to Queequeg as the standard-bearer of this
Title:  forlorn hope.  There, then, he sat, holding up that imbecile candle
Title:  in the heart of that almighty forlornness.  There, then, he sat, the
Title:  sign and symbol of a man without faith, hopelessly holding up hope in
Title:  the midst of despair.
Title:  
Title:  Wet, drenched through, and shivering cold, despairing of ship or
Title:  boat, we lifted up our eyes as the dawn came on.  The mist still
Title:  spread over the sea, the empty lantern lay crushed in the bottom of
Title:  the boat.  Suddenly Queequeg started to his feet, hollowing his hand
Title:  to his ear.  We all heard a faint creaking, as of ropes and yards
Title:  hitherto muffled by the storm.  The sound came nearer and nearer; the
Title:  thick mists were dimly parted by a huge, vague form.  Affrighted, we
Title:  all sprang into the sea as the ship at last loomed into view, bearing
Title:  right down upon us within a distance of not much more than its
Title:  length.
Title:  
Title:  Floating on the waves we saw the abandoned boat, as for one instant
Title:  it tossed and gaped beneath the ship's bows like a chip at the base
Title:  of a cataract; and then the vast hull rolled over it, and it was seen
Title:  no more till it came up weltering astern.  Again we swam for it, were
Title:  dashed against it by the seas, and were at last taken up and safely
Title:  landed on board.  Ere the squall came close to, the other boats had
Title:  cut loose from their fish and returned to the ship in good time.  The
Title:  ship had given us up, but was still cruising, if haply it might light
Title:  upon some token of our perishing,--an oar or a lance pole.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 49
Title:  
Title:  The Hyena.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed
Title:  affair we call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast
Title:  practical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and
Title:  more than suspects that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own.
Title:  However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while disputing.
Title:  He bolts down all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions,
Title:  all hard things visible and invisible, never mind how knobby; as an
Title:  ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints.  And
Title:  as for small difficulties and worryings, prospects of sudden
Title:  disaster, peril of life and limb; all these, and death itself, seem
Title:  to him only sly, good-natured hits, and jolly punches in the side
Title:  bestowed by the unseen and unaccountable old joker.  That odd sort of
Title:  wayward mood I am speaking of, comes over a man only in some time of
Title:  extreme tribulation; it comes in the very midst of his earnestness,
Title:  so that what just before might have seemed to him a thing most
Title:  momentous, now seems but a part of the general joke.  There is
Title:  nothing like the perils of whaling to breed this free and easy sort
Title:  of genial, desperado philosophy; and with it I now regarded this
Title:  whole voyage of the Pequod, and the great White Whale its object.
Title:  
Title:  "Queequeg," said I, when they had dragged me, the last man, to the
Title:  deck, and I was still shaking myself in my jacket to fling off the
Title:  water; "Queequeg, my fine friend, does this sort of thing often
Title:  happen?"  Without much emotion, though soaked through just like me,
Title:  he gave me to understand that such things did often happen.
Title:  
Title:  "Mr. Stubb," said I, turning to that worthy, who, buttoned up in his
Title:  oil-jacket, was now calmly smoking his pipe in the rain; "Mr. Stubb,
Title:  I think I have heard you say that of all whalemen you ever met, our
Title:  chief mate, Mr. Starbuck, is by far the most careful and prudent.  I
Title:  suppose then, that going plump on a flying whale with your sail set
Title:  in a foggy squall is the height of a whaleman's discretion?"
Title:  
Title:  "Certain.  I've lowered for whales from a leaking ship in a gale off
Title:  Cape Horn."
Title:  
Title:  "Mr. Flask," said I, turning to little King-Post, who was standing
Title:  close by; "you are experienced in these things, and I am not.  Will
Title:  you tell me whether it is an unalterable law in this fishery, Mr.
Title:  Flask, for an oarsman to break his own back pulling himself
Title:  back-foremost into death's jaws?"
Title:  
Title:  "Can't you twist that smaller?" said Flask.  "Yes, that's the law.  I
Title:  should like to see a boat's crew backing water up to a whale face
Title:  foremost.  Ha, ha! the whale would give them squint for squint, mind
Title:  that!"
Title:  
Title:  Here then, from three impartial witnesses, I had a deliberate
Title:  statement of the entire case.  Considering, therefore, that squalls
Title:  and capsizings in the water and consequent bivouacks on the deep,
Title:  were matters of common occurrence in this kind of life; considering
Title:  that at the superlatively critical instant of going on to the whale I
Title:  must resign my life into the hands of him who steered the
Title:  boat--oftentimes a fellow who at that very moment is in his
Title:  impetuousness upon the point of scuttling the craft with his own
Title:  frantic stampings; considering that the particular disaster to our
Title:  own particular boat was chiefly to be imputed to Starbuck's driving
Title:  on to his whale almost in the teeth of a squall, and considering that
Title:  Starbuck, notwithstanding, was famous for his great heedfulness in
Title:  the fishery; considering that I belonged to this uncommonly prudent
Title:  Starbuck's boat; and finally considering in what a devil's chase I
Title:  was implicated, touching the White Whale: taking all things together,
Title:  I say, I thought I might as well go below and make a rough draft of
Title:  my will.  "Queequeg," said I, "come along, you shall be my lawyer,
Title:  executor, and legatee."
Title:  
Title:  It may seem strange that of all men sailors should be tinkering at
Title:  their last wills and testaments, but there are no people in the world
Title:  more fond of that diversion.  This was the fourth time in my nautical
Title:  life that I had done the same thing.  After the ceremony was
Title:  concluded upon the present occasion, I felt all the easier; a stone
Title:  was rolled away from my heart.  Besides, all the days I should now
Title:  live would be as good as the days that Lazarus lived after his
Title:  resurrection; a supplementary clean gain of so many months or weeks
Title:  as the case might be.  I survived myself; my death and burial were
Title:  locked up in my chest.  I looked round me tranquilly and contentedly,
Title:  like a quiet ghost with a clean conscience sitting inside the bars of
Title:  a snug family vault.
Title:  
Title:  Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my
Title:  frock, here goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction,
Title:  and the devil fetch the hindmost.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 50
Title:  
Title:  Ahab's Boat and Crew.  Fedallah.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Who would have thought it, Flask!" cried Stubb; "if I had but one
Title:  leg you would not catch me in a boat, unless maybe to stop the
Title:  plug-hole with my timber toe.  Oh! he's a wonderful old man!"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't think it so strange, after all, on that account," said
Title:  Flask.  "If his leg were off at the hip, now, it would be a different
Title:  thing.  That would disable him; but he has one knee, and good part of
Title:  the other left, you know."
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know that, my little man; I never yet saw him kneel."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Among whale-wise people it has often been argued whether, considering
Title:  the paramount importance of his life to the success of the voyage, it
Title:  is right for a whaling captain to jeopardize that life in the active
Title:  perils of the chase.  So Tamerlane's soldiers often argued with tears
Title:  in their eyes, whether that invaluable life of his ought to be
Title:  carried into the thickest of the fight.
Title:  
Title:  But with Ahab the question assumed a modified aspect.  Considering
Title:  that with two legs man is but a hobbling wight in all times of
Title:  danger; considering that the pursuit of whales is always under great
Title:  and extraordinary difficulties; that every individual moment, indeed,
Title:  then comprises a peril; under these circumstances is it wise for any
Title:  maimed man to enter a whale-boat in the hunt?  As a general thing,
Title:  the joint-owners of the Pequod must have plainly thought not.
Title:  
Title:  Ahab well knew that although his friends at home would think little
Title:  of his entering a boat in certain comparatively harmless vicissitudes
Title:  of the chase, for the sake of being near the scene of action and
Title:  giving his orders in person, yet for Captain Ahab to have a boat
Title:  actually apportioned to him as a regular headsman in the hunt--above
Title:  all for Captain Ahab to be supplied with five extra men, as that same
Title:  boat's crew, he well knew that such generous conceits never entered the
Title:  heads of the owners of the Pequod.  Therefore he had not solicited a
Title:  boat's crew from them, nor had he in any way hinted his desires on
Title:  that head.  Nevertheless he had taken private measures of his own
Title:  touching all that matter.  Until Cabaco's published discovery, the
Title:  sailors had little foreseen it, though to be sure when, after being a
Title:  little while out of port, all hands had concluded the customary
Title:  business of fitting the whaleboats for service; when some time after
Title:  this Ahab was now and then found bestirring himself in the matter of
Title:  making thole-pins with his own hands for what was thought to be one
Title:  of the spare boats, and even solicitously cutting the small wooden
Title:  skewers, which when the line is running out are pinned over the
Title:  groove in the bow: when all this was observed in him, and
Title:  particularly his solicitude in having an extra coat of sheathing in
Title:  the bottom of the boat, as if to make it better withstand the pointed
Title:  pressure of his ivory limb; and also the anxiety he evinced in
Title:  exactly shaping the thigh board, or clumsy cleat, as it is sometimes
Title:  called, the horizontal piece in the boat's bow for bracing the knee
Title:  against in darting or stabbing at the whale; when it was observed how
Title:  often he stood up in that boat with his solitary knee fixed in the
Title:  semi-circular depression in the cleat, and with the carpenter's
Title:  chisel gouged out a little here and straightened it a little there;
Title:  all these things, I say, had awakened much interest and curiosity at
Title:  the time.  But almost everybody supposed that this particular
Title:  preparative heedfulness in Ahab must only be with a view to the
Title:  ultimate chase of Moby Dick; for he had already revealed his
Title:  intention to hunt that mortal monster in person.  But such a
Title:  supposition did by no means involve the remotest suspicion as to any
Title:  boat's crew being assigned to that boat.
Title:  
Title:  Now, with the subordinate phantoms, what wonder remained soon waned
Title:  away; for in a whaler wonders soon wane.  Besides, now and then such
Title:  unaccountable odds and ends of strange nations come up from the
Title:  unknown nooks and ash-holes of the earth to man these floating
Title:  outlaws of whalers; and the ships themselves often pick up such queer
Title:  castaway creatures found tossing about the open sea on planks, bits
Title:  of wreck, oars, whaleboats, canoes, blown-off Japanese junks, and
Title:  what not; that Beelzebub himself might climb up the side and step
Title:  down into the cabin to chat with the captain, and it would not create
Title:  any unsubduable excitement in the forecastle.
Title:  
Title:  But be all this as it may, certain it is that while the subordinate
Title:  phantoms soon found their place among the crew, though still as it
Title:  were somehow distinct from them, yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah
Title:  remained a muffled mystery to the last.  Whence he came in a mannerly
Title:  world like this, by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evinced
Title:  himself to be linked with Ahab's peculiar fortunes; nay, so far as to
Title:  have some sort of a half-hinted influence; Heaven knows, but it might
Title:  have been even authority over him; all this none knew.  But one
Title:  cannot sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah.  He was such a
Title:  creature as civilized, domestic people in the temperate zone only see
Title:  in their dreams, and that but dimly; but the like of whom now and
Title:  then glide among the unchanging Asiatic communities, especially the
Title:  Oriental isles to the east of the continent--those insulated,
Title:  immemorial, unalterable countries, which even in these modern days
Title:  still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of earth's primal
Title:  generations, when the memory of the first man was a distinct
Title:  recollection, and all men his descendants, unknowing whence he came,
Title:  eyed each other as real phantoms, and asked of the sun and the moon
Title:  why they were created and to what end; when though, according to
Title:  Genesis, the angels indeed consorted with the daughters of men, the
Title:  devils also, add the uncanonical Rabbins, indulged in mundane amours.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 51
Title:  
Title:  The Spirit-Spout.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Days, weeks passed, and under easy sail, the ivory Pequod had slowly
Title:  swept across four several cruising-grounds; that off the Azores; off
Title:  the Cape de Verdes; on the Plate (so called), being off the mouth of
Title:  the Rio de la Plata; and the Carrol Ground, an unstaked, watery
Title:  locality, southerly from St. Helena.
Title:  
Title:  It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and
Title:  moonlight night, when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver;
Title:  and, by their soft, suffusing seethings, made what seemed a silvery
Title:  silence, not a solitude; on such a silent night a silvery jet was
Title:  seen far in advance of the white bubbles at the bow.  Lit up by the
Title:  moon, it looked celestial; seemed some plumed and glittering god
Title:  uprising from the sea.  Fedallah first descried this jet.  For of
Title:  these moonlight nights, it was his wont to mount to the main-mast
Title:  head, and stand a look-out there, with the same precision as if it
Title:  had been day.  And yet, though herds of whales were seen by night,
Title:  not one whaleman in a hundred would venture a lowering for them.  You
Title:  may think with what emotions, then, the seamen beheld this old
Title:  Oriental perched aloft at such unusual hours; his turban and the
Title:  moon, companions in one sky.  But when, after spending his uniform
Title:  interval there for several successive nights without uttering a
Title:  single sound; when, after all this silence, his unearthly voice was
Title:  heard announcing that silvery, moon-lit jet, every reclining mariner
Title:  started to his feet as if some winged spirit had lighted in the
Title:  rigging, and hailed the mortal crew.  "There she blows!"  Had the
Title:  trump of judgment blown, they could not have quivered more; yet still
Title:  they felt no terror; rather pleasure.  For though it was a most
Title:  unwonted hour, yet so impressive was the cry, and so deliriously
Title:  exciting, that almost every soul on board instinctively desired a
Title:  lowering.
Title:  
Title:  Walking the deck with quick, side-lunging strides, Ahab commanded the
Title:  t'gallant sails and royals to be set, and every stunsail spread.  The
Title:  best man in the ship must take the helm.  Then, with every mast-head
Title:  manned, the piled-up craft rolled down before the wind.  The strange,
Title:  upheaving, lifting tendency of the taffrail breeze filling the
Title:  hollows of so many sails, made the buoyant, hovering deck to feel
Title:  like air beneath the feet; while still she rushed along, as if two
Title:  antagonistic influences were struggling in her--one to mount direct
Title:  to heaven, the other to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal.  And
Title:  had you watched Ahab's face that night, you would have thought that
Title:  in him also two different things were warring.  While his one live
Title:  leg made lively echoes along the deck, every stroke of his dead limb
Title:  sounded like a coffin-tap.  On life and death this old man walked.
Title:  But though the ship so swiftly sped, and though from every eye, like
Title:  arrows, the eager glances shot, yet the silvery jet was no more seen
Title:  that night.  Every sailor swore he saw it once, but not a second
Title:  time.
Title:  
Title:  This midnight-spout had almost grown a forgotten thing, when, some
Title:  days after, lo! at the same silent hour, it was again announced:
Title:  again it was descried by all; but upon making sail to overtake it,
Title:  once more it disappeared as if it had never been.  And so it served
Title:  us night after night, till no one heeded it but to wonder at it.
Title:  Mysteriously jetted into the clear moonlight, or starlight, as the
Title:  case might be; disappearing again for one whole day, or two days, or
Title:  three; and somehow seeming at every distinct repetition to be
Title:  advancing still further and further in our van, this solitary jet
Title:  seemed for ever alluring us on.
Title:  
Title:  Nor with the immemorial superstition of their race, and in accordance
Title:  with the preternaturalness, as it seemed, which in many things
Title:  invested the Pequod, were there wanting some of the seamen who swore
Title:  that whenever and wherever descried; at however remote times, or in
Title:  however far apart latitudes and longitudes, that unnearable spout was
Title:  cast by one self-same whale; and that whale, Moby Dick.  For a time,
Title:  there reigned, too, a sense of peculiar dread at this flitting
Title:  apparition, as if it were treacherously beckoning us on and on, in
Title:  order that the monster might turn round upon us, and rend us at last
Title:  in the remotest and most savage seas.
Title:  
Title:  These temporary apprehensions, so vague but so awful, derived a
Title:  wondrous potency from the contrasting serenity of the weather, in
Title:  which, beneath all its blue blandness, some thought there lurked a
Title:  devilish charm, as for days and days we voyaged along, through seas
Title:  so wearily, lonesomely mild, that all space, in repugnance to our
Title:  vengeful errand, seemed vacating itself of life before our urn-like
Title:  prow.
Title:  
Title:  But, at last, when turning to the eastward, the Cape winds began
Title:  howling around us, and we rose and fell upon the long, troubled seas
Title:  that are there; when the ivory-tusked Pequod sharply bowed to the
Title:  blast, and gored the dark waves in her madness, till, like showers of
Title:  silver chips, the foam-flakes flew over her bulwarks; then all this
Title:  desolate vacuity of life went away, but gave place to sights more
Title:  dismal than before.
Title:  
Title:  Close to our bows, strange forms in the water darted hither and
Title:  thither before us; while thick in our rear flew the inscrutable
Title:  sea-ravens.  And every morning, perched on our stays, rows of these
Title:  birds were seen; and spite of our hootings, for a long time
Title:  obstinately clung to the hemp, as though they deemed our ship some
Title:  drifting, uninhabited craft; a thing appointed to desolation, and
Title:  therefore fit roosting-place for their homeless selves.  And heaved
Title:  and heaved, still unrestingly heaved the black sea, as if its vast
Title:  tides were a conscience; and the great mundane soul were in anguish
Title:  and remorse for the long sin and suffering it had bred.
Title:  
Title:  Cape of Good Hope, do they call ye?  Rather Cape Tormentoto, as
Title:  called of yore; for long allured by the perfidious silences that
Title:  before had attended us, we found ourselves launched into this
Title:  tormented sea, where guilty beings transformed into those fowls and
Title:  these fish, seemed condemned to swim on everlastingly without any
Title:  haven in store, or beat that black air without any horizon.  But
Title:  calm, snow-white, and unvarying; still directing its fountain of
Title:  feathers to the sky; still beckoning us on from before, the solitary
Title:  jet would at times be descried.
Title:  
Title:  During all this blackness of the elements, Ahab, though assuming for
Title:  the time the almost continual command of the drenched and dangerous
Title:  deck, manifested the gloomiest reserve; and more seldom than ever
Title:  addressed his mates.  In tempestuous times like these, after
Title:  everything above and aloft has been secured, nothing more can be done
Title:  but passively to await the issue of the gale.  Then Captain and crew
Title:  become practical fatalists.  So, with his ivory leg inserted into its
Title:  accustomed hole, and with one hand firmly grasping a shroud, Ahab for
Title:  hours and hours would stand gazing dead to windward, while an
Title:  occasional squall of sleet or snow would all but congeal his very
Title:  eyelashes together.  Meantime, the crew driven from the forward part
Title:  of the ship by the perilous seas that burstingly broke over its bows,
Title:  stood in a line along the bulwarks in the waist; and the better to
Title:  guard against the leaping waves, each man had slipped himself into a
Title:  sort of bowline secured to the rail, in which he swung as in a
Title:  loosened belt.  Few or no words were spoken; and the silent ship, as
Title:  if manned by painted sailors in wax, day after day tore on through
Title:  all the swift madness and gladness of the demoniac waves.  By night
Title:  the same muteness of humanity before the shrieks of the ocean
Title:  prevailed; still in silence the men swung in the bowlines; still
Title:  wordless Ahab stood up to the blast.  Even when wearied nature seemed
Title:  demanding repose he would not seek that repose in his hammock.
Title:  Never could Starbuck forget the old man's aspect, when one night
Title:  going down into the cabin to mark how the barometer stood, he saw him
Title:  with closed eyes sitting straight in his floor-screwed chair; the
Title:  rain and half-melted sleet of the storm from which he had some time
Title:  before emerged, still slowly dripping from the unremoved hat and
Title:  coat.  On the table beside him lay unrolled one of those charts of
Title:  tides and currents which have previously been spoken of.  His lantern
Title:  swung from his tightly clenched hand.  Though the body was erect, the
Title:  head was thrown back so that the closed eyes were pointed towards the
Title:  needle of the tell-tale that swung from a beam in the ceiling.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *The cabin-compass is called the tell-tale, because without going to
Title:  the compass at the helm, the Captain, while below, can inform himself
Title:  of the course of the ship.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Terrible old man! thought Starbuck with a shudder, sleeping in this
Title:  gale, still thou steadfastly eyest thy purpose.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 52
Title:  
Title:  The Albatross.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  South-eastward from the Cape, off the distant Crozetts, a good
Title:  cruising ground for Right Whalemen, a sail loomed ahead, the Goney
Title:  (Albatross) by name.  As she slowly drew nigh, from my lofty perch at
Title:  the fore-mast-head, I had a good view of that sight so remarkable to
Title:  a tyro in the far ocean fisheries--a whaler at sea, and long absent
Title:  from home.
Title:  
Title:  As if the waves had been fullers, this craft was bleached like the
Title:  skeleton of a stranded walrus.  All down her sides, this spectral
Title:  appearance was traced with long channels of reddened rust, while all
Title:  her spars and her rigging were like the thick branches of trees
Title:  furred over with hoar-frost.  Only her lower sails were set.  A wild
Title:  sight it was to see her long-bearded look-outs at those three
Title:  mast-heads.  They seemed clad in the skins of beasts, so torn and
Title:  bepatched the raiment that had survived nearly four years of
Title:  cruising.  Standing in iron hoops nailed to the mast, they swayed and
Title:  swung over a fathomless sea; and though, when the ship slowly glided
Title:  close under our stern, we six men in the air came so nigh to each
Title:  other that we might almost have leaped from the mast-heads of one
Title:  ship to those of the other; yet, those forlorn-looking fishermen,
Title:  mildly eyeing us as they passed, said not one word to our own
Title:  look-outs, while the quarter-deck hail was being heard from below.
Title:  
Title:  "Ship ahoy!  Have ye seen the White Whale?"
Title:  
Title:  But as the strange captain, leaning over the pallid bulwarks, was in
Title:  the act of putting his trumpet to his mouth, it somehow fell from his
Title:  hand into the sea; and the wind now rising amain, he in vain strove
Title:  to make himself heard without it.  Meantime his ship was still
Title:  increasing the distance between.  While in various silent ways
Title:  the seamen of the Pequod were evincing their observance of this
Title:  ominous incident at the first mere mention of the White Whale's name
Title:  to another ship, Ahab for a moment paused; it almost seemed as though
Title:  he would have lowered a boat to board the stranger, had not the
Title:  threatening wind forbade.  But taking advantage of his windward
Title:  position, he again seized his trumpet, and knowing by her aspect that
Title:  the stranger vessel was a Nantucketer and shortly bound home, he
Title:  loudly hailed--"Ahoy there!  This is the Pequod, bound round the
Title:  world!  Tell them to address all future letters to the Pacific ocean!
Title:  and this time three years, if I am not at home, tell them to address
Title:  them to--"
Title:  
Title:  At that moment the two wakes were fairly crossed, and instantly,
Title:  then, in accordance with their singular ways, shoals of small
Title:  harmless fish, that for some days before had been placidly swimming
Title:  by our side, darted away with what seemed shuddering fins, and ranged
Title:  themselves fore and aft with the stranger's flanks.  Though in the
Title:  course of his continual voyagings Ahab must often before have noticed
Title:  a similar sight, yet, to any monomaniac man, the veriest trifles
Title:  capriciously carry meanings.
Title:  
Title:  "Swim away from me, do ye?" murmured Ahab, gazing over into the
Title:  water.  There seemed but little in the words, but the tone conveyed
Title:  more of deep helpless sadness than the insane old man had ever before
Title:  evinced.  But turning to the steersman, who thus far had been holding
Title:  the ship in the wind to diminish her headway, he cried out in his old
Title:  lion voice,--"Up helm!  Keep her off round the world!"
Title:  
Title:  Round the world!  There is much in that sound to inspire proud
Title:  feelings; but whereto does all that circumnavigation conduct?  Only
Title:  through numberless perils to the very point whence we started, where
Title:  those that we left behind secure, were all the time before us.
Title:  
Title:  Were this world an endless plain, and by sailing eastward we could
Title:  for ever reach new distances, and discover sights more sweet and
Title:  strange than any Cyclades or Islands of King Solomon, then there were
Title:  promise in the voyage.  But in pursuit of those far mysteries we
Title:  dream of, or in tormented chase of that demon phantom that, some time
Title:  or other, swims before all human hearts; while chasing such over this
Title:  round globe, they either lead us on in barren mazes or midway leave
Title:  us whelmed.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 53
Title:  
Title:  The Gam.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The ostensible reason why Ahab did not go on board of the whaler we
Title:  had spoken was this: the wind and sea betokened storms.  But even had
Title:  this not been the case, he would not after all, perhaps, have boarded
Title:  her--judging by his subsequent conduct on similar occasions--if so it
Title:  had been that, by the process of hailing, he had obtained a negative
Title:  answer to the question he put.  For, as it eventually turned out, he
Title:  cared not to consort, even for five minutes, with any stranger
Title:  captain, except he could contribute some of that information he so
Title:  absorbingly sought.  But all this might remain inadequately
Title:  estimated, were not something said here of the peculiar usages of
Title:  whaling-vessels when meeting each other in foreign seas, and
Title:  especially on a common cruising-ground.
Title:  
Title:  If two strangers crossing the Pine Barrens in New York State, or the
Title:  equally desolate Salisbury Plain in England; if casually encountering
Title:  each other in such inhospitable wilds, these twain, for the life of
Title:  them, cannot well avoid a mutual salutation; and stopping for a
Title:  moment to interchange the news; and, perhaps, sitting down for a
Title:  while and resting in concert: then, how much more natural that upon
Title:  the illimitable Pine Barrens and Salisbury Plains of the sea, two
Title:  whaling vessels descrying each other at the ends of the earth--off
Title:  lone Fanning's Island, or the far away King's Mills; how much more
Title:  natural, I say, that under such circumstances these ships should not
Title:  only interchange hails, but come into still closer, more friendly and
Title:  sociable contact.  And especially would this seem to be a matter of
Title:  course, in the case of vessels owned in one seaport, and whose
Title:  captains, officers, and not a few of the men are personally known to
Title:  each other; and consequently, have all sorts of dear domestic things
Title:  to talk about.
Title:  
Title:  For the long absent ship, the outward-bounder, perhaps, has letters
Title:  on board; at any rate, she will be sure to let her have some papers
Title:  of a date a year or two later than the last one on her blurred and
Title:  thumb-worn files.  And in return for that courtesy, the outward-bound
Title:  ship would receive the latest whaling intelligence from the
Title:  cruising-ground to which she may be destined, a thing of the utmost
Title:  importance to her.  And in degree, all this will hold true concerning
Title:  whaling vessels crossing each other's track on the cruising-ground
Title:  itself, even though they are equally long absent from home.  For one
Title:  of them may have received a transfer of letters from some third, and
Title:  now far remote vessel; and some of those letters may be for the
Title:  people of the ship she now meets.  Besides, they would exchange the
Title:  whaling news, and have an agreeable chat.  For not only would they
Title:  meet with all the sympathies of sailors, but likewise with all the
Title:  peculiar congenialities arising from a common pursuit and mutually
Title:  shared privations and perils.
Title:  
Title:  Nor would difference of country make any very essential difference;
Title:  that is, so long as both parties speak one language, as is the case
Title:  with Americans and English.  Though, to be sure, from the small
Title:  number of English whalers, such meetings do not very often occur, and
Title:  when they do occur there is too apt to be a sort of shyness between
Title:  them; for your Englishman is rather reserved, and your Yankee, he
Title:  does not fancy that sort of thing in anybody but himself.  Besides,
Title:  the English whalers sometimes affect a kind of metropolitan
Title:  superiority over the American whalers; regarding the long, lean
Title:  Nantucketer, with his nondescript provincialisms, as a sort of
Title:  sea-peasant.  But where this superiority in the English whalemen
Title:  does really consist, it would be hard to say, seeing that the Yankees
Title:  in one day, collectively, kill more whales than all the English,
Title:  collectively, in ten years.  But this is a harmless little foible in
Title:  the English whale-hunters, which the Nantucketer does not take much
Title:  to heart; probably, because he knows that he has a few foibles
Title:  himself.
Title:  
Title:  So, then, we see that of all ships separately sailing the sea, the
Title:  whalers have most reason to be sociable--and they are so.  Whereas,
Title:  some merchant ships crossing each other's wake in the mid-Atlantic,
Title:  will oftentimes pass on without so much as a single word of
Title:  recognition, mutually cutting each other on the high seas, like a
Title:  brace of dandies in Broadway; and all the time indulging, perhaps, in
Title:  finical criticism upon each other's rig.  As for Men-of-War, when
Title:  they chance to meet at sea, they first go through such a string of
Title:  silly bowings and scrapings, such a ducking of ensigns, that there
Title:  does not seem to be much right-down hearty good-will and brotherly
Title:  love about it at all.  As touching Slave-ships meeting, why, they are
Title:  in such a prodigious hurry, they run away from each other as soon as
Title:  possible.  And as for Pirates, when they chance to cross each other's
Title:  cross-bones, the first hail is--"How many skulls?"--the same way that
Title:  whalers hail--"How many barrels?"  And that question once answered,
Title:  pirates straightway steer apart, for they are infernal villains on
Title:  both sides, and don't like to see overmuch of each other's villanous
Title:  likenesses.
Title:  
Title:  But look at the godly, honest, unostentatious, hospitable, sociable,
Title:  free-and-easy whaler!  What does the whaler do when she meets another
Title:  whaler in any sort of decent weather?  She has a "GAM," a thing so
Title:  utterly unknown to all other ships that they never heard of the name
Title:  even; and if by chance they should hear of it, they only grin at it,
Title:  and repeat gamesome stuff about "spouters" and "blubber-boilers," and
Title:  such like pretty exclamations.  Why it is that all Merchant-seamen,
Title:  and also all Pirates and Man-of-War's men, and Slave-ship sailors,
Title:  cherish such a scornful feeling towards Whale-ships; this is a
Title:  question it would be hard to answer.  Because, in the case of
Title:  pirates, say, I should like to know whether that profession of theirs
Title:  has any peculiar glory about it.  It sometimes ends in uncommon
Title:  elevation, indeed; but only at the gallows.  And besides, when a man
Title:  is elevated in that odd fashion, he has no proper foundation for his
Title:  superior altitude.  Hence, I conclude, that in boasting himself to be
Title:  high lifted above a whaleman, in that assertion the pirate has no
Title:  solid basis to stand on.
Title:  
Title:  But what is a GAM?  You might wear out your index-finger running up
Title:  and down the columns of dictionaries, and never find the word.  Dr.
Title:  Johnson never attained to that erudition; Noah Webster's ark does not
Title:  hold it.  Nevertheless, this same expressive word has now for many
Title:  years been in constant use among some fifteen thousand true born
Title:  Yankees.  Certainly, it needs a definition, and should be
Title:  incorporated into the Lexicon.  With that view, let me learnedly
Title:  define it.
Title:  
Title:  GAM.  NOUN--A SOCIAL MEETING OF TWO (OR MORE) WHALESHIPS, GENERALLY
Title:  ON A CRUISING-GROUND; WHEN, AFTER EXCHANGING HAILS, THEY EXCHANGE
Title:  VISITS BY BOATS' CREWS; THE TWO CAPTAINS REMAINING, FOR THE TIME, ON
Title:  BOARD OF ONE SHIP, AND THE TWO CHIEF MATES ON THE OTHER.
Title:  
Title:  There is another little item about Gamming which must not be
Title:  forgotten here.  All professions have their own little peculiarities
Title:  of detail; so has the whale fishery.  In a pirate, man-of-war, or
Title:  slave ship, when the captain is rowed anywhere in his boat, he always
Title:  sits in the stern sheets on a comfortable, sometimes cushioned seat
Title:  there, and often steers himself with a pretty little milliner's
Title:  tiller decorated with gay cords and ribbons.  But the whale-boat has
Title:  no seat astern, no sofa of that sort whatever, and no tiller at all.
Title:  High times indeed, if whaling captains were wheeled about the water
Title:  on castors like gouty old aldermen in patent chairs.  And as for a
Title:  tiller, the whale-boat never admits of any such effeminacy; and
Title:  therefore as in gamming a complete boat's crew must leave the ship,
Title:  and hence as the boat steerer or harpooneer is of the number, that
Title:  subordinate is the steersman upon the occasion, and the captain,
Title:  having no place to sit in, is pulled off to his visit all standing
Title:  like a pine tree.  And often you will notice that being conscious of
Title:  the eyes of the whole visible world resting on him from the sides of
Title:  the two ships, this standing captain is all alive to the importance
Title:  of sustaining his dignity by maintaining his legs.  Nor is this any
Title:  very easy matter; for in his rear is the immense projecting steering
Title:  oar hitting him now and then in the small of his back, the after-oar
Title:  reciprocating by rapping his knees in front.  He is thus completely
Title:  wedged before and behind, and can only expand himself sideways by
Title:  settling down on his stretched legs; but a sudden, violent pitch of
Title:  the boat will often go far to topple him, because length of
Title:  foundation is nothing without corresponding breadth.  Merely make a
Title:  spread angle of two poles, and you cannot stand them up.  Then,
Title:  again, it would never do in plain sight of the world's riveted eyes,
Title:  it would never do, I say, for this straddling captain to be seen
Title:  steadying himself the slightest particle by catching hold of anything
Title:  with his hands; indeed, as token of his entire, buoyant self-command,
Title:  he generally carries his hands in his trowsers' pockets; but perhaps
Title:  being generally very large, heavy hands, he carries them there for
Title:  ballast.  Nevertheless there have occurred instances, well
Title:  authenticated ones too, where the captain has been known for an
Title:  uncommonly critical moment or two, in a sudden squall say--to seize
Title:  hold of the nearest oarsman's hair, and hold on there like grim
Title:  death.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 54
Title:  
Title:  The Town-Ho's Story.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  (AS TOLD AT THE GOLDEN INN)
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The Cape of Good Hope, and all the watery region round about there,
Title:  is much like some noted four corners of a great highway, where you
Title:  meet more travellers than in any other part.
Title:  
Title:  It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another
Title:  homeward-bound whaleman, the Town-Ho,* was encountered.  She was
Title:  manned almost wholly by Polynesians.  In the short gam that ensued
Title:  she gave us strong news of Moby Dick.  To some the general interest
Title:  in the White Whale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance of the
Title:  Town-Ho's story, which seemed obscurely to involve with the whale a
Title:  certain wondrous, inverted visitation of one of those so called
Title:  judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men.  This
Title:  latter circumstance, with its own particular accompaniments, forming
Title:  what may be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be
Title:  narrated, never reached the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates.  For
Title:  that secret part of the story was unknown to the captain of the
Title:  Town-Ho himself.  It was the private property of three confederate
Title:  white seamen of that ship, one of whom, it seems, communicated it to
Title:  Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy, but the following night
Title:  Tashtego rambled in his sleep, and revealed so much of it in that
Title:  way, that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest.
Title:  Nevertheless, so potent an influence did this thing have on those
Title:  seamen in the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it, and by
Title:  such a strange delicacy, to call it so, were they governed in this
Title:  matter, that they kept the secret among themselves so that it never
Title:  transpired abaft the Pequod's main-mast.  Interweaving in its proper
Title:  place this darker thread with the story as publicly narrated on the
Title:  ship, the whole of this strange affair I now proceed to put on
Title:  lasting record.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the
Title:  mast-head, still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos
Title:  terrapin.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  For my humor's sake, I shall preserve the style in which I once
Title:  narrated it at Lima, to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends, one
Title:  saint's eve, smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden
Title:  Inn.  Of those fine cavaliers, the young Dons, Pedro and Sebastian,
Title:  were on the closer terms with me; and hence the interluding questions
Title:  they occasionally put, and which are duly answered at the time.
Title:  
Title:  "Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am
Title:  about rehearsing to you, gentlemen, the Town-Ho, Sperm Whaler of
Title:  Nantucket, was cruising in your Pacific here, not very many days'
Title:  sail eastward from the eaves of this good Golden Inn.  She was
Title:  somewhere to the northward of the Line.  One morning upon handling
Title:  the pumps, according to daily usage, it was observed that she made
Title:  more water in her hold than common.  They supposed a sword-fish had
Title:  stabbed her, gentlemen.  But the captain, having some unusual reason
Title:  for believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes; and
Title:  therefore being very averse to quit them, and the leak not being then
Title:  considered at all dangerous, though, indeed, they could not find it
Title:  after searching the hold as low down as was possible in rather heavy
Title:  weather, the ship still continued her cruisings, the mariners working
Title:  at the pumps at wide and easy intervals; but no good luck came; more
Title:  days went by, and not only was the leak yet undiscovered, but it
Title:  sensibly increased.  So much so, that now taking some alarm, the
Title:  captain, making all sail, stood away for the nearest harbor among the
Title:  islands, there to have his hull hove out and repaired.
Title:  
Title:  "Though no small passage was before her, yet, if the commonest chance
Title:  favoured, he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the
Title:  way, because his pumps were of the best, and being periodically
Title:  relieved at them, those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep
Title:  the ship free; never mind if the leak should double on her.  In
Title:  truth, well nigh the whole of this passage being attended by very
Title:  prosperous breezes, the Town-Ho had all but certainly arrived in
Title:  perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least
Title:  fatality, had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney, the
Title:  mate, a Vineyarder, and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt,
Title:  a Lakeman and desperado from Buffalo.
Title:  
Title:  "'Lakeman!--Buffalo!  Pray, what is a Lakeman, and where is Buffalo?'
Title:  said Don Sebastian, rising in his swinging mat of grass.
Title:  
Title:  "On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie, Don; but--I crave your
Title:  courtesy--may be, you shall soon hear further of all that.  Now,
Title:  gentlemen, in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships, well-nigh as
Title:  large and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old Callao to far
Title:  Manilla; this Lakeman, in the land-locked heart of our America, had
Title:  yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting impressions
Title:  popularly connected with the open ocean.  For in their interflowing
Title:  aggregate, those grand fresh-water seas of ours,--Erie, and Ontario,
Title:  and Huron, and Superior, and Michigan,--possess an ocean-like
Title:  expansiveness, with many of the ocean's noblest traits; with many of
Title:  its rimmed varieties of races and of climes.  They contain round
Title:  archipelagoes of romantic isles, even as the Polynesian waters do; in
Title:  large part, are shored by two great contrasting nations, as the
Title:  Atlantic is; they furnish long maritime approaches to our numerous
Title:  territorial colonies from the East, dotted all round their banks;
Title:  here and there are frowned upon by batteries, and by the goat-like
Title:  craggy guns of lofty Mackinaw; they have heard the fleet thunderings
Title:  of naval victories; at intervals, they yield their beaches to wild
Title:  barbarians, whose red painted faces flash from out their peltry
Title:  wigwams; for leagues and leagues are flanked by ancient and unentered
Title:  forests, where the gaunt pines stand like serried lines of kings in
Title:  Gothic genealogies; those same woods harboring wild Afric beasts of
Title:  prey, and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar
Title:  Emperors; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland, as
Title:  well as Winnebago villages; they float alike the full-rigged merchant
Title:  ship, the armed cruiser of the State, the steamer, and the beech
Title:  canoe; they are swept by Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as
Title:  any that lash the salted wave; they know what shipwrecks are, for out
Title:  of sight of land, however inland, they have drowned full many a
Title:  midnight ship with all its shrieking crew.  Thus, gentlemen, though
Title:  an inlander, Steelkilt was wild-ocean born, and wild-ocean nurtured;
Title:  as much of an audacious mariner as any.  And for Radney, though in
Title:  his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach, to
Title:  nurse at his maternal sea; though in after life he had long followed
Title:  our austere Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific; yet was he quite
Title:  as vengeful and full of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman, fresh
Title:  from the latitudes of buck-horn handled bowie-knives.  Yet was this
Title:  Nantucketer a man with some good-hearted traits; and this Lakeman, a
Title:  mariner, who though a sort of devil indeed, might yet by inflexible
Title:  firmness, only tempered by that common decency of human recognition
Title:  which is the meanest slave's right; thus treated, this Steelkilt had
Title:  long been retained harmless and docile.  At all events, he had proved
Title:  so thus far; but Radney was doomed and made mad, and Steelkilt--but,
Title:  gentlemen, you shall hear.
Title:  
Title:  "It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her
Title:  prow for her island haven, that the Town-Ho's leak seemed again
Title:  increasing, but only so as to require an hour or more at the pumps
Title:  every day.  You must know that in a settled and civilized ocean like
Title:  our Atlantic, for example, some skippers think little of pumping
Title:  their whole way across it; though of a still, sleepy night, should
Title:  the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that respect,
Title:  the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again
Title:  remember it, on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom.
Title:  Nor in the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward,
Title:  gentlemen, is it altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at
Title:  their pump-handles in full chorus even for a voyage of considerable
Title:  length; that is, if it lie along a tolerably accessible coast, or if
Title:  any other reasonable retreat is afforded them.  It is only when a
Title:  leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of those waters,
Title:  some really landless latitude, that her captain begins to feel a
Title:  little anxious.
Title:  
Title:  "Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho; so when her leak was
Title:  found gaining once more, there was in truth some small concern
Title:  manifested by several of her company; especially by Radney the mate.
Title:  He commanded the upper sails to be well hoisted, sheeted home anew,
Title:  and every way expanded to the breeze.  Now this Radney, I suppose,
Title:  was as little of a coward, and as little inclined to any sort of
Title:  nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless,
Title:  unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently
Title:  imagine, gentlemen.  Therefore when he betrayed this solicitude about
Title:  the safety of the ship, some of the seamen declared that it was only
Title:  on account of his being a part owner in her.  So when they were
Title:  working that evening at the pumps, there was on this head no small
Title:  gamesomeness slily going on among them, as they stood with their feet
Title:  continually overflowed by the rippling clear water; clear as any
Title:  mountain spring, gentlemen--that bubbling from the pumps ran across
Title:  the deck, and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee
Title:  scupper-holes.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, as you well know, it is not seldom the case in this
Title:  conventional world of ours--watery or otherwise; that when a person
Title:  placed in command over his fellow-men finds one of them to be very
Title:  significantly his superior in general pride of manhood, straightway
Title:  against that man he conceives an unconquerable dislike and
Title:  bitterness; and if he have a chance he will pull down and pulverize
Title:  that subaltern's tower, and make a little heap of dust of it.  Be
Title:  this conceit of mine as it may, gentlemen, at all events Steelkilt
Title:  was a tall and noble animal with a head like a Roman, and a flowing
Title:  golden beard like the tasseled housings of your last viceroy's
Title:  snorting charger; and a brain, and a heart, and a soul in him,
Title:  gentlemen, which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne, had he been born son
Title:  to Charlemagne's father.  But Radney, the mate, was ugly as a mule;
Title:  yet as hardy, as stubborn, as malicious.  He did not love Steelkilt,
Title:  and Steelkilt knew it.
Title:  
Title:  "Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the
Title:  rest, the Lakeman affected not to notice him, but unawed, went on
Title:  with his gay banterings.
Title:  
Title:  "'Aye, aye, my merry lads, it's a lively leak this; hold a cannikin,
Title:  one of ye, and let's have a taste.  By the Lord, it's worth bottling!
Title:  I tell ye what, men, old Rad's investment must go for it! he had
Title:  best cut away his part of the hull and tow it home.  The fact is,
Title:  boys, that sword-fish only began the job; he's come back again with a
Title:  gang of ship-carpenters, saw-fish, and file-fish, and what not; and
Title:  the whole posse of 'em are now hard at work cutting and slashing at
Title:  the bottom; making improvements, I suppose.  If old Rad were here
Title:  now, I'd tell him to jump overboard and scatter 'em.  They're playing
Title:  the devil with his estate, I can tell him.  But he's a simple old
Title:  soul,--Rad, and a beauty too.  Boys, they say the rest of his
Title:  property is invested in looking-glasses.  I wonder if he'd give a
Title:  poor devil like me the model of his nose.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Damn your eyes! what's that pump stopping for?' roared Radney,
Title:  pretending not to have heard the sailors' talk.  'Thunder away at
Title:  it!'
Title:  
Title:  'Aye, aye, sir,' said Steelkilt, merry as a cricket.  'Lively, boys,
Title:  lively, now!'  And with that the pump clanged like fifty
Title:  fire-engines; the men tossed their hats off to it, and ere long that
Title:  peculiar gasping of the lungs was heard which denotes the fullest
Title:  tension of life's utmost energies.
Title:  
Title:  "Quitting the pump at last, with the rest of his band, the Lakeman
Title:  went forward all panting, and sat himself down on the windlass; his
Title:  face fiery red, his eyes bloodshot, and wiping the profuse sweat from
Title:  his brow.  Now what cozening fiend it was, gentlemen, that possessed
Title:  Radney to meddle with such a man in that corporeally exasperated
Title:  state, I know not; but so it happened.  Intolerably striding along
Title:  the deck, the mate commanded him to get a broom and sweep down the
Title:  planks, and also a shovel, and remove some offensive matters
Title:  consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large.
Title:  
Title:  "Now, gentlemen, sweeping a ship's deck at sea is a piece of
Title:  household work which in all times but raging gales is regularly
Title:  attended to every evening; it has been known to be done in the case
Title:  of ships actually foundering at the time.  Such, gentlemen, is the
Title:  inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive love of neatness in
Title:  seamen; some of whom would not willingly drown without first washing
Title:  their faces.  But in all vessels this broom business is the
Title:  prescriptive province of the boys, if boys there be aboard.  Besides,
Title:  it was the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into
Title:  gangs, taking turns at the pumps; and being the most athletic seaman
Title:  of them all, Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one of
Title:  the gangs; consequently he should have been freed from any trivial
Title:  business not connected with truly nautical duties, such being the
Title:  case with his comrades.  I mention all these particulars so that you
Title:  may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men.
Title:  
Title:  "But there was more than this: the order about the shovel was almost
Title:  as plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt, as though Radney had
Title:  spat in his face.  Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will
Title:  understand this; and all this and doubtless much more, the Lakeman
Title:  fully comprehended when the mate uttered his command.  But as he sat
Title:  still for a moment, and as he steadfastly looked into the mate's
Title:  malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in
Title:  him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them; as he
Title:  instinctively saw all this, that strange forbearance and
Title:  unwillingness to stir up the deeper passionateness in any already
Title:  ireful being--a repugnance most felt, when felt at all, by really
Title:  valiant men even when aggrieved--this nameless phantom feeling,
Title:  gentlemen, stole over Steelkilt.
Title:  
Title:  "Therefore, in his ordinary tone, only a little broken by the bodily
Title:  exhaustion he was temporarily in, he answered him saying that
Title:  sweeping the deck was not his business, and he would not do it.  And
Title:  then, without at all alluding to the shovel, he pointed to three
Title:  lads as the customary sweepers; who, not being billeted at the
Title:  pumps, had done little or nothing all day.  To this, Radney replied
Title:  with an oath, in a most domineering and outrageous manner
Title:  unconditionally reiterating his command; meanwhile advancing upon the
Title:  still seated Lakeman, with an uplifted cooper's club hammer which he
Title:  had snatched from a cask near by.
Title:  
Title:  "Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps,
Title:  for all his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating
Title:  Steelkilt could but ill brook this bearing in the mate; but somehow
Title:  still smothering the conflagration within him, without speaking he
Title:  remained doggedly rooted to his seat, till at last the incensed
Title:  Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face, furiously
Title:  commanding him to do his bidding.
Title:  
Title:  "Steelkilt rose, and slowly retreating round the windlass, steadily
Title:  followed by the mate with his menacing hammer, deliberately repeated
Title:  his intention not to obey.  Seeing, however, that his forbearance had
Title:  not the slightest effect, by an awful and unspeakable intimation with
Title:  his twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man; but it
Title:  was to no purpose.  And in this way the two went once slowly round
Title:  the windlass; when, resolved at last no longer to retreat, bethinking
Title:  him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his humor, the
Title:  Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer:
Title:  
Title:  "'Mr. Radney, I will not obey you.  Take that hammer away, or look to
Title:  yourself.'  But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him,
Title:  where the Lakeman stood fixed, now shook the heavy hammer within an
Title:  inch of his teeth; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable
Title:  maledictions.  Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch;
Title:  stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching poniard of his glance,
Title:  Steelkilt, clenching his right hand behind him and creepingly drawing
Title:  it back, told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek
Title:  he (Steelkilt) would murder him.  But, gentlemen, the fool had been
Title:  branded for the slaughter by the gods.  Immediately the hammer
Title:  touched the cheek; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was
Title:  stove in his head; he fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale.
Title:  
Title:  "Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays
Title:  leading far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their
Title:  mastheads.  They were both Canallers.
Title:  
Title:  "'Canallers!' cried Don Pedro.  'We have seen many whale-ships in our
Title:  harbours, but never heard of your Canallers.  Pardon: who and what are
Title:  they?'
Title:  
Title:  "'Canallers, Don, are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal.
Title:  You must have heard of it.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Nay, Senor; hereabouts in this dull, warm, most lazy, and
Title:  hereditary land, we know but little of your vigorous North.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Aye?  Well then, Don, refill my cup.  Your chicha's very fine; and
Title:  ere proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are; for
Title:  such information may throw side-light upon my story.'
Title:  
Title:  "For three hundred and sixty miles, gentlemen, through the entire
Title:  breadth of the state of New York; through numerous populous cities
Title:  and most thriving villages; through long, dismal, uninhabited swamps,
Title:  and affluent, cultivated fields, unrivalled for fertility; by
Title:  billiard-room and bar-room; through the holy-of-holies of great
Title:  forests; on Roman arches over Indian rivers; through sun and shade;
Title:  by happy hearts or broken; through all the wide contrasting scenery
Title:  of those noble Mohawk counties; and especially, by rows of snow-white
Title:  chapels, whose spires stand almost like milestones, flows one
Title:  continual stream of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life.
Title:  There's your true Ashantee, gentlemen; there howl your pagans; where
Title:  you ever find them, next door to you; under the long-flung shadow,
Title:  and the snug patronising lee of churches.  For by some curious
Title:  fatality, as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters that
Title:  they ever encamp around the halls of justice, so sinners, gentlemen,
Title:  most abound in holiest vicinities.
Title:  
Title:  "'Is that a friar passing?' said Don Pedro, looking downwards into
Title:  the crowded plazza, with humorous concern.
Title:  
Title:  "'Well for our northern friend, Dame Isabella's Inquisition wanes in
Title:  Lima,' laughed Don Sebastian.  'Proceed, Senor.'
Title:  
Title:  "'A moment!  Pardon!' cried another of the company.  'In the name of
Title:  all us Limeese, I but desire to express to you, sir sailor, that we
Title:  have by no means overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present
Title:  Lima for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison.  Oh! do not bow
Title:  and look surprised; you know the proverb all along this
Title:  coast--"Corrupt as Lima."  It but bears out your saying, too;
Title:  churches more plentiful than billiard-tables, and for ever open--and
Title:  "Corrupt as Lima."  So, too, Venice; I have been there; the holy city
Title:  of the blessed evangelist, St. Mark!--St. Dominic, purge it!  Your
Title:  cup!  Thanks: here I refill; now, you pour out again.'
Title:  
Title:  "Freely depicted in his own vocation, gentlemen, the Canaller would
Title:  make a fine dramatic hero, so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is
Title:  he.  Like Mark Antony, for days and days along his green-turfed,
Title:  flowery Nile, he indolently floats, openly toying with his
Title:  red-cheeked Cleopatra, ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny
Title:  deck.  But ashore, all this effeminacy is dashed.  The brigandish
Title:  guise which the Canaller so proudly sports; his slouched and
Title:  gaily-ribboned hat betoken his grand features.  A terror to the
Title:  smiling innocence of the villages through which he floats; his swart
Title:  visage and bold swagger are not unshunned in cities.  Once a vagabond
Title:  on his own canal, I have received good turns from one of these
Title:  Canallers; I thank him heartily; would fain be not ungrateful; but it
Title:  is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your man of
Title:  violence, that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor
Title:  stranger in a strait, as to plunder a wealthy one.  In sum,
Title:  gentlemen, what the wildness of this canal life is, is emphatically
Title:  evinced by this; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of its
Title:  most finished graduates, and that scarce any race of mankind, except
Title:  Sydney men, are so much distrusted by our whaling captains.  Nor does
Title:  it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter, that to many
Title:  thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line, the
Title:  probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition
Title:  between quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field, and recklessly
Title:  ploughing the waters of the most barbaric seas.
Title:  
Title:  "'I see!  I see!' impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro, spilling his
Title:  chicha upon his silvery ruffles.  'No need to travel!  The world's
Title:  one Lima.  I had thought, now, that at your temperate North the
Title:  generations were cold and holy as the hills.--But the story.'
Title:  
Title:  "I left off, gentlemen, where the Lakeman shook the backstay.
Title:  Hardly had he done so, when he was surrounded by the three junior
Title:  mates and the four harpooneers, who all crowded him to the deck.  But
Title:  sliding down the ropes like baleful comets, the two Canallers rushed
Title:  into the uproar, and sought to drag their man out of it towards the
Title:  forecastle.  Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt,
Title:  and a twisted turmoil ensued; while standing out of harm's way, the
Title:  valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike, calling upon
Title:  his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel, and smoke him
Title:  along to the quarter-deck.  At intervals, he ran close up to the
Title:  revolving border of the confusion, and prying into the heart of it
Title:  with his pike, sought to prick out the object of his resentment.  But
Title:  Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too much for them all; they
Title:  succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck, where, hastily slewing
Title:  about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass, these
Title:  sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade.
Title:  
Title:  "'Come out of that, ye pirates!' roared the captain, now menacing
Title:  them with a pistol in each hand, just brought to him by the steward.
Title:  'Come out of that, ye cut-throats!'
Title:  
Title:  "Steelkilt leaped on the barricade, and striding up and down there,
Title:  defied the worst the pistols could do; but gave the captain to
Title:  understand distinctly, that his (Steelkilt's) death would be the
Title:  signal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands.  Fearing in
Title:  his heart lest this might prove but too true, the captain a little
Title:  desisted, but still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to
Title:  their duty.
Title:  
Title:  "'Will you promise not to touch us, if we do?' demanded their
Title:  ringleader.
Title:  
Title:  "'Turn to! turn to!--I make no promise;--to your duty!  Do you want
Title:  to sink the ship, by knocking off at a time like this?  Turn to!' and
Title:  he once more raised a pistol.
Title:  
Title:  "'Sink the ship?' cried Steelkilt.  'Aye, let her sink.  Not a man of
Title:  us turns to, unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us.
Title:  What say ye, men?' turning to his comrades.  A fierce cheer was their
Title:  response.
Title:  
Title:  "The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade, all the while keeping his
Title:  eye on the Captain, and jerking out such sentences as these:--'It's
Title:  not our fault; we didn't want it; I told him to take his hammer away;
Title:  it was boy's business; he might have known me before this; I told him
Title:  not to prick the buffalo; I believe I have broken a finger here
Title:  against his cursed jaw; ain't those mincing knives down in the
Title:  forecastle there, men? look to those handspikes, my hearties.
Title:  Captain, by God, look to yourself; say the word; don't be a fool;
Title:  forget it all; we are ready to turn to; treat us decently, and we're
Title:  your men; but we won't be flogged.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Turn to!  I make no promises, turn to, I say!'
Title:  
Title:  "'Look ye, now,' cried the Lakeman, flinging out his arm towards him,
Title:  'there are a few of us here (and I am one of them) who have shipped
Title:  for the cruise, d'ye see; now as you well know, sir, we can claim our
Title:  discharge as soon as the anchor is down; so we don't want a row; it's
Title:  not our interest; we want to be peaceable; we are ready to work, but
Title:  we won't be flogged.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Turn to!' roared the Captain.
Title:  
Title:  "Steelkilt glanced round him a moment, and then said:--'I tell you
Title:  what it is now, Captain, rather than kill ye, and be hung for such a
Title:  shabby rascal, we won't lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us;
Title:  but till you say the word about not flogging us, we don't do a hand's
Title:  turn.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Down into the forecastle then, down with ye, I'll keep ye there
Title:  till ye're sick of it.  Down ye go.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Shall we?' cried the ringleader to his men.  Most of them were
Title:  against it; but at length, in obedience to Steelkilt, they preceded
Title:  him down into their dark den, growlingly disappearing, like bears
Title:  into a cave.
Title:  
Title:  "As the Lakeman's bare head was just level with the planks, the
Title:  Captain and his posse leaped the barricade, and rapidly drawing over
Title:  the slide of the scuttle, planted their group of hands upon it, and
Title:  loudly called for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock
Title:  belonging to the companionway.
Title:  
Title:  Then opening the slide a little, the Captain whispered something down
Title:  the crack, closed it, and turned the key upon them--ten in
Title:  number--leaving on deck some twenty or more, who thus far had
Title:  remained neutral.
Title:  
Title:  "All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers, forward
Title:  and aft, especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway;
Title:  at which last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge, after
Title:  breaking through the bulkhead below.  But the hours of darkness
Title:  passed in peace; the men who still remained at their duty toiling
Title:  hard at the pumps, whose clinking and clanking at intervals through
Title:  the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship.
Title:  
Title:  "At sunrise the Captain went forward, and knocking on the deck,
Title:  summoned the prisoners to work; but with a yell they refused.  Water
Title:  was then lowered down to them, and a couple of handfuls of biscuit
Title:  were tossed after it; when again turning the key upon them and
Title:  pocketing it, the Captain returned to the quarter-deck.  Twice every
Title:  day for three days this was repeated; but on the fourth morning a
Title:  confused wrangling, and then a scuffling was heard, as the customary
Title:  summons was delivered; and suddenly four men burst up from the
Title:  forecastle, saying they were ready to turn to.  The fetid closeness
Title:  of the air, and a famishing diet, united perhaps to some fears of
Title:  ultimate retribution, had constrained them to surrender at
Title:  discretion.  Emboldened by this, the Captain reiterated his demand to
Title:  the rest, but Steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific hint to stop his
Title:  babbling and betake himself where he belonged.  On the fifth morning
Title:  three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from the
Title:  desperate arms below that sought to restrain them.  Only three were
Title:  left.
Title:  
Title:  "'Better turn to, now?' said the Captain with a heartless jeer.
Title:  
Title:  "'Shut us up again, will ye!' cried Steelkilt.
Title:  
Title:  "'Oh certainly,' the Captain, and the key clicked.
Title:  
Title:  "It was at this point, gentlemen, that enraged by the defection of
Title:  seven of his former associates, and stung by the mocking voice that
Title:  had last hailed him, and maddened by his long entombment in a place
Title:  as black as the bowels of despair; it was then that Steelkilt
Title:  proposed to the two Canallers, thus far apparently of one mind with
Title:  him, to burst out of their hole at the next summoning of the
Title:  garrison; and armed with their keen mincing knives (long, crescentic,
Title:  heavy implements with a handle at each end) run amuck from the
Title:  bowsprit to the taffrail; and if by any devilishness of desperation
Title:  possible, seize the ship.  For himself, he would do this, he said,
Title:  whether they joined him or not.  That was the last night he should
Title:  spend in that den.  But the scheme met with no opposition on the part
Title:  of the other two; they swore they were ready for that, or for any
Title:  other mad thing, for anything in short but a surrender.  And what was
Title:  more, they each insisted upon being the first man on deck, when the
Title:  time to make the rush should come.  But to this their leader as
Title:  fiercely objected, reserving that priority for himself; particularly
Title:  as his two comrades would not yield, the one to the other, in the
Title:  matter; and both of them could not be first, for the ladder would but
Title:  admit one man at a time.  And here, gentlemen, the foul play of these
Title:  miscreants must come out.
Title:  
Title:  "Upon hearing the frantic project of their leader, each in his own
Title:  separate soul had suddenly lighted, it would seem, upon the same
Title:  piece of treachery, namely: to be foremost in breaking out, in
Title:  order to be the first of the three, though the last of the ten, to
Title:  surrender; and thereby secure whatever small chance of pardon such
Title:  conduct might merit.  But when Steelkilt made known his determination
Title:  still to lead them to the last, they in some way, by some subtle
Title:  chemistry of villany, mixed their before secret treacheries together;
Title:  and when their leader fell into a doze, verbally opened their souls
Title:  to each other in three sentences; and bound the sleeper with cords,
Title:  and gagged him with cords; and shrieked out for the Captain at
Title:  midnight.
Title:  
Title:  "Thinking murder at hand, and smelling in the dark for the blood, he
Title:  and all his armed mates and harpooneers rushed for the forecastle.
Title:  In a few minutes the scuttle was opened, and, bound hand and foot,
Title:  the still struggling ringleader was shoved up into the air by his
Title:  perfidious allies, who at once claimed the honour of securing a man
Title:  who had been fully ripe for murder.  But all these were collared, and
Title:  dragged along the deck like dead cattle; and, side by side, were
Title:  seized up into the mizzen rigging, like three quarters of meat, and
Title:  there they hung till morning.  'Damn ye,' cried the Captain, pacing
Title:  to and fro before them, 'the vultures would not touch ye, ye
Title:  villains!'
Title:  
Title:  "At sunrise he summoned all hands; and separating those who had
Title:  rebelled from those who had taken no part in the mutiny, he told the
Title:  former that he had a good mind to flog them all round--thought, upon
Title:  the whole, he would do so--he ought to--justice demanded it; but for
Title:  the present, considering their timely surrender, he would let them go
Title:  with a reprimand, which he accordingly administered in the vernacular.
Title:  
Title:  "'But as for you, ye carrion rogues,' turning to the three men in the
Title:  rigging--'for you, I mean to mince ye up for the try-pots;' and,
Title:  seizing a rope, he applied it with all his might to the backs of the
Title:  two traitors, till they yelled no more, but lifelessly hung their
Title:  heads sideways, as the two crucified thieves are drawn.
Title:  
Title:  "'My wrist is sprained with ye!' he cried, at last; 'but there is
Title:  still rope enough left for you, my fine bantam, that wouldn't give
Title:  up.  Take that gag from his mouth, and let us hear what he can say
Title:  for himself.'
Title:  
Title:  "For a moment the exhausted mutineer made a tremulous motion of his
Title:  cramped jaws, and then painfully twisting round his head, said in a
Title:  sort of hiss, 'What I say is this--and mind it well--if you flog me,
Title:  I murder you!'
Title:  
Title:  "'Say ye so? then see how ye frighten me'--and the Captain drew off
Title:  with the rope to strike.
Title:  
Title:  "'Best not,' hissed the Lakeman.
Title:  
Title:  "'But I must,'--and the rope was once more drawn back for the stroke.
Title:  
Title:  "Steelkilt here hissed out something, inaudible to all but the
Title:  Captain; who, to the amazement of all hands, started back, paced the
Title:  deck rapidly two or three times, and then suddenly throwing down his
Title:  rope, said, 'I won't do it--let him go--cut him down: d'ye hear?'
Title:  
Title:  But as the junior mates were hurrying to execute the order, a pale
Title:  man, with a bandaged head, arrested them--Radney the chief mate.
Title:  Ever since the blow, he had lain in his berth; but that morning,
Title:  hearing the tumult on the deck, he had crept out, and thus far had
Title:  watched the whole scene.  Such was the state of his mouth, that he
Title:  could hardly speak; but mumbling something about his being willing
Title:  and able to do what the captain dared not attempt, he snatched the
Title:  rope and advanced to his pinioned foe.
Title:  
Title:  "'You are a coward!' hissed the Lakeman.
Title:  
Title:  "'So I am, but take that.'  The mate was in the very act of striking,
Title:  when another hiss stayed his uplifted arm.  He paused: and then
Title:  pausing no more, made good his word, spite of Steelkilt's threat,
Title:  whatever that might have been.  The three men were then cut down, all
Title:  hands were turned to, and, sullenly worked by the moody seamen, the
Title:  iron pumps clanged as before.
Title:  
Title:  "Just after dark that day, when one watch had retired below, a clamor
Title:  was heard in the forecastle; and the two trembling traitors running
Title:  up, besieged the cabin door, saying they durst not consort with the
Title:  crew.  Entreaties, cuffs, and kicks could not drive them back, so at
Title:  their own instance they were put down in the ship's run for
Title:  salvation.  Still, no sign of mutiny reappeared among the rest.  On
Title:  the contrary, it seemed, that mainly at Steelkilt's instigation, they
Title:  had resolved to maintain the strictest peacefulness, obey all orders
Title:  to the last, and, when the ship reached port, desert her in a body.
Title:  But in order to insure the speediest end to the voyage, they all
Title:  agreed to another thing--namely, not to sing out for whales, in case
Title:  any should be discovered.  For, spite of her leak, and spite of all her
Title:  other perils, the Town-Ho still maintained her mast-heads, and her
Title:  captain was just as willing to lower for a fish that moment, as on
Title:  the day his craft first struck the cruising ground; and Radney the mate
Title:  was quite as ready to change his berth for a boat, and with his
Title:  bandaged mouth seek to gag in death the vital jaw of the whale.
Title:  
Title:  "But though the Lakeman had induced the seamen to adopt this sort of
Title:  passiveness in their conduct, he kept his own counsel (at least till
Title:  all was over) concerning his own proper and private revenge upon the
Title:  man who had stung him in the ventricles of his heart.  He was in
Title:  Radney the chief mate's watch; and as if the infatuated man sought to
Title:  run more than half way to meet his doom, after the scene at the
Title:  rigging, he insisted, against the express counsel of the captain,
Title:  upon resuming the head of his watch at night.  Upon this, and one or
Title:  two other circumstances, Steelkilt systematically built the plan of
Title:  his revenge.
Title:  
Title:  "During the night, Radney had an unseamanlike way of sitting on the
Title:  bulwarks of the quarter-deck, and leaning his arm upon the gunwale of
Title:  the boat which was hoisted up there, a little above the ship's side.
Title:  In this attitude, it was well known, he sometimes dozed.  There was a
Title:  considerable vacancy between the boat and the ship, and down between
Title:  this was the sea.  Steelkilt calculated his time, and found that his
Title:  next trick at the helm would come round at two o'clock, in the
Title:  morning of the third day from that in which he had been betrayed.  At
Title:  his leisure, he employed the interval in braiding something very
Title:  carefully in his watches below.
Title:  
Title:  "'What are you making there?' said a shipmate.
Title:  
Title:  "'What do you think? what does it look like?'
Title:  
Title:  "'Like a lanyard for your bag; but it's an odd one, seems to me.'
Title:  
Title:  'Yes, rather oddish,' said the Lakeman, holding it at arm's length
Title:  before him; 'but I think it will answer.  Shipmate, I haven't enough
Title:  twine,--have you any?'
Title:  
Title:  "But there was none in the forecastle.
Title:  
Title:  "'Then I must get some from old Rad;' and he rose to go aft.
Title:  
Title:  "'You don't mean to go a begging to HIM!' said a sailor.
Title:  
Title:  "'Why not?  Do you think he won't do me a turn, when it's to help
Title:  himself in the end, shipmate?' and going to the mate, he looked at
Title:  him quietly, and asked him for some twine to mend his hammock.  It
Title:  was given him--neither twine nor lanyard were seen again; but the
Title:  next night an iron ball, closely netted, partly rolled from the
Title:  pocket of the Lakeman's monkey jacket, as he was tucking the coat
Title:  into his hammock for a pillow.  Twenty-four hours after, his trick at
Title:  the silent helm--nigh to the man who was apt to doze over the grave
Title:  always ready dug to the seaman's hand--that fatal hour was then to
Title:  come; and in the fore-ordaining soul of Steelkilt, the mate was
Title:  already stark and stretched as a corpse, with his forehead crushed
Title:  in.
Title:  
Title:  "But, gentlemen, a fool saved the would-be murderer from the bloody
Title:  deed he had planned.  Yet complete revenge he had, and without being
Title:  the avenger.  For by a mysterious fatality, Heaven itself seemed to
Title:  step in to take out of his hands into its own the damning thing he
Title:  would have done.
Title:  
Title:  "It was just between daybreak and sunrise of the morning of the
Title:  second day, when they were washing down the decks, that a stupid
Title:  Teneriffe man, drawing water in the main-chains, all at once shouted
Title:  out, 'There she rolls! there she rolls!'  Jesu, what a whale!  It was
Title:  Moby Dick.
Title:  
Title:  "'Moby Dick!' cried Don Sebastian; 'St. Dominic!  Sir sailor, but do
Title:  whales have christenings?  Whom call you Moby Dick?'
Title:  
Title:  "'A very white, and famous, and most deadly immortal monster,
Title:  Don;--but that would be too long a story.'
Title:  
Title:  "'How? how?' cried all the young Spaniards, crowding.
Title:  
Title:  "'Nay, Dons, Dons--nay, nay!  I cannot rehearse that now.  Let me get
Title:  more into the air, Sirs.'
Title:  
Title:  "'The chicha! the chicha!' cried Don Pedro; 'our vigorous friend looks
Title:  faint;--fill up his empty glass!'
Title:  
Title:  "No need, gentlemen; one moment, and I proceed.--Now, gentlemen, so
Title:  suddenly perceiving the snowy whale within fifty yards of the
Title:  ship--forgetful of the compact among the crew--in the excitement of
Title:  the moment, the Teneriffe man had instinctively and involuntarily
Title:  lifted his voice for the monster, though for some little time past it
Title:  had been plainly beheld from the three sullen mast-heads.  All was
Title:  now a phrensy.  'The White Whale--the White Whale!' was the cry from
Title:  captain, mates, and harpooneers, who, undeterred by fearful rumours,
Title:  were all anxious to capture so famous and precious a fish; while the
Title:  dogged crew eyed askance, and with curses, the appalling beauty of
Title:  the vast milky mass, that lit up by a horizontal spangling sun,
Title:  shifted and glistened like a living opal in the blue morning sea.
Title:  Gentlemen, a strange fatality pervades the whole career of these
Title:  events, as if verily mapped out before the world itself was charted.
Title:  The mutineer was the bowsman of the mate, and when fast to a fish, it
Title:  was his duty to sit next him, while Radney stood up with his lance in
Title:  the prow, and haul in or slacken the line, at the word of command.
Title:  Moreover, when the four boats were lowered, the mate's got the start;
Title:  and none howled more fiercely with delight than did Steelkilt, as he
Title:  strained at his oar.  After a stiff pull, their harpooneer got fast,
Title:  and, spear in hand, Radney sprang to the bow.  He was always a
Title:  furious man, it seems, in a boat.  And now his bandaged cry was, to
Title:  beach him on the whale's topmost back.  Nothing loath, his bowsman
Title:  hauled him up and up, through a blinding foam that blent two
Title:  whitenesses together; till of a sudden the boat struck as against a
Title:  sunken ledge, and keeling over, spilled out the standing mate.  That
Title:  instant, as he fell on the whale's slippery back, the boat righted,
Title:  and was dashed aside by the swell, while Radney was tossed over into
Title:  the sea, on the other flank of the whale.  He struck out through the
Title:  spray, and, for an instant, was dimly seen through that veil, wildly
Title:  seeking to remove himself from the eye of Moby Dick.  But the whale
Title:  rushed round in a sudden maelstrom; seized the swimmer between his
Title:  jaws; and rearing high up with him, plunged headlong again, and went
Title:  down.
Title:  
Title:  "Meantime, at the first tap of the boat's bottom, the Lakeman had
Title:  slackened the line, so as to drop astern from the whirlpool; calmly
Title:  looking on, he thought his own thoughts.  But a sudden, terrific,
Title:  downward jerking of the boat, quickly brought his knife to the line.
Title:  He cut it; and the whale was free.  But, at some distance, Moby Dick
Title:  rose again, with some tatters of Radney's red woollen shirt, caught
Title:  in the teeth that had destroyed him.  All four boats gave chase
Title:  again; but the whale eluded them, and finally wholly disappeared.
Title:  
Title:  "In good time, the Town-Ho reached her port--a savage, solitary
Title:  place--where no civilized creature resided.  There, headed by the
Title:  Lakeman, all but five or six of the foremastmen deliberately
Title:  deserted among the palms; eventually, as it turned out, seizing a
Title:  large double war-canoe of the savages, and setting sail for some
Title:  other harbor.
Title:  
Title:  "The ship's company being reduced to but a handful, the captain
Title:  called upon the Islanders to assist him in the laborious business of
Title:  heaving down the ship to stop the leak.  But to such unresting
Title:  vigilance over their dangerous allies was this small band of whites
Title:  necessitated, both by night and by day, and so extreme was the hard
Title:  work they underwent, that upon the vessel being ready again for sea,
Title:  they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst not put
Title:  off with them in so heavy a vessel.  After taking counsel with his
Title:  officers, he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible; loaded
Title:  and ran out his two cannon from the bows; stacked his muskets on the
Title:  poop; and warning the Islanders not to approach the ship at their
Title:  peril, took one man with him, and setting the sail of his best
Title:  whale-boat, steered straight before the wind for Tahiti, five hundred
Title:  miles distant, to procure a reinforcement to his crew.
Title:  
Title:  "On the fourth day of the sail, a large canoe was descried, which
Title:  seemed to have touched at a low isle of corals.  He steered away from
Title:  it; but the savage craft bore down on him; and soon the voice of
Title:  Steelkilt hailed him to heave to, or he would run him under water.
Title:  The captain presented a pistol.  With one foot on each prow of the
Title:  yoked war-canoes, the Lakeman laughed him to scorn; assuring him that
Title:  if the pistol so much as clicked in the lock, he would bury him in
Title:  bubbles and foam.
Title:  
Title:  "'What do you want of me?' cried the captain.
Title:  
Title:  "'Where are you bound? and for what are you bound?' demanded
Title:  Steelkilt; 'no lies.'
Title:  
Title:  "'I am bound to Tahiti for more men.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Very good.  Let me board you a moment--I come in peace.'  With that
Title:  he leaped from the canoe, swam to the boat; and climbing the gunwale,
Title:  stood face to face with the captain.
Title:  
Title:  "'Cross your arms, sir; throw back your head.  Now, repeat after me.
Title:  As soon as Steelkilt leaves me, I swear to beach this boat on yonder
Title:  island, and remain there six days.  If I do not, may lightning strike
Title:  me!'
Title:  
Title:  "'A pretty scholar,' laughed the Lakeman.  'Adios, Senor!' and
Title:  leaping into the sea, he swam back to his comrades.
Title:  
Title:  "Watching the boat till it was fairly beached, and drawn up to the
Title:  roots of the cocoa-nut trees, Steelkilt made sail again, and in due
Title:  time arrived at Tahiti, his own place of destination.  There, luck
Title:  befriended him; two ships were about to sail for France, and were
Title:  providentially in want of precisely that number of men which the
Title:  sailor headed.  They embarked; and so for ever got the start of
Title:  their former captain, had he been at all minded to work them legal
Title:  retribution.
Title:  
Title:  "Some ten days after the French ships sailed, the whale-boat arrived,
Title:  and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more civilized
Title:  Tahitians, who had been somewhat used to the sea.  Chartering a small
Title:  native schooner, he returned with them to his vessel; and finding all
Title:  right there, again resumed his cruisings.
Title:  
Title:  "Where Steelkilt now is, gentlemen, none know; but upon the island of
Title:  Nantucket, the widow of Radney still turns to the sea which refuses
Title:  to give up its dead; still in dreams sees the awful white whale that
Title:  destroyed him.
Title:  
Title:  "'Are you through?' said Don Sebastian, quietly.
Title:  
Title:  "'I am, Don.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Then I entreat you, tell me if to the best of your own convictions,
Title:  this your story is in substance really true?  It is so passing
Title:  wonderful!  Did you get it from an unquestionable source?  Bear with
Title:  me if I seem to press.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Also bear with all of us, sir sailor; for we all join in Don
Title:  Sebastian's suit,' cried the company, with exceeding interest.
Title:  
Title:  "'Is there a copy of the Holy Evangelists in the Golden Inn,
Title:  gentlemen?'
Title:  
Title:  "'Nay,' said Don Sebastian; 'but I know a worthy priest near by, who
Title:  will quickly procure one for me.  I go for it; but are you well
Title:  advised? this may grow too serious.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Will you be so good as to bring the priest also, Don?'
Title:  
Title:  "'Though there are no Auto-da-Fe's in Lima now,' said one of the
Title:  company to another; 'I fear our sailor friend runs risk of the
Title:  archiepiscopacy.  Let us withdraw more out of the moonlight.  I see
Title:  no need of this.'
Title:  
Title:  "'Excuse me for running after you, Don Sebastian; but may I also beg
Title:  that you will be particular in procuring the largest sized
Title:  Evangelists you can.'
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  'This is the priest, he brings you the Evangelists,' said Don
Title:  Sebastian, gravely, returning with a tall and solemn figure.
Title:  
Title:  "'Let me remove my hat.  Now, venerable priest, further into the
Title:  light, and hold the Holy Book before me that I may touch it.
Title:  
Title:  "'So help me Heaven, and on my honour the story I have told ye,
Title:  gentlemen, is in substance and its great items, true.  I know it to
Title:  be true; it happened on this ball; I trod the ship; I knew the crew;
Title:  I have seen and talked with Steelkilt since the death of Radney.'"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 55
Title:  
Title:  Of the Monstrous Pictures of Whales.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I shall ere long paint to you as well as one can without canvas,
Title:  something like the true form of the whale as he actually appears to
Title:  the eye of the whaleman when in his own absolute body the whale is
Title:  moored alongside the whale-ship so that he can be fairly stepped upon
Title:  there.  It may be worth while, therefore, previously to advert to
Title:  those curious imaginary portraits of him which even down to the
Title:  present day confidently challenge the faith of the landsman.  It is
Title:  time to set the world right in this matter, by proving such pictures
Title:  of the whale all wrong.
Title:  
Title:  It may be that the primal source of all those pictorial delusions
Title:  will be found among the oldest Hindoo, Egyptian, and Grecian
Title:  sculptures.  For ever since those inventive but unscrupulous times
Title:  when on the marble panellings of temples, the pedestals of statues,
Title:  and on shields, medallions, cups, and coins, the dolphin was drawn in
Title:  scales of chain-armor like Saladin's, and a helmeted head like St.
Title:  George's; ever since then has something of the same sort of license
Title:  prevailed, not only in most popular pictures of the whale, but in
Title:  many scientific presentations of him.
Title:  
Title:  Now, by all odds, the most ancient extant portrait anyways purporting
Title:  to be the whale's, is to be found in the famous cavern-pagoda of
Title:  Elephanta, in India.  The Brahmins maintain that in the almost
Title:  endless sculptures of that immemorial pagoda, all the trades and
Title:  pursuits, every conceivable avocation of man, were prefigured ages
Title:  before any of them actually came into being.  No wonder then, that in
Title:  some sort our noble profession of whaling should have been there
Title:  shadowed forth.  The Hindoo whale referred to, occurs in a separate
Title:  department of the wall, depicting the incarnation of Vishnu in the
Title:  form of leviathan, learnedly known as the Matse Avatar.  But though
Title:  this sculpture is half man and half whale, so as only to give the
Title:  tail of the latter, yet that small section of him is all wrong.  It
Title:  looks more like the tapering tail of an anaconda, than the broad palms
Title:  of the true whale's majestic flukes.
Title:  
Title:  But go to the old Galleries, and look now at a great Christian
Title:  painter's portrait of this fish; for he succeeds no better than the
Title:  antediluvian Hindoo.  It is Guido's picture of Perseus rescuing
Title:  Andromeda from the sea-monster or whale.  Where did Guido get the
Title:  model of such a strange creature as that?  Nor does Hogarth, in
Title:  painting the same scene in his own "Perseus Descending," make out one
Title:  whit better.  The huge corpulence of that Hogarthian monster
Title:  undulates on the surface, scarcely drawing one inch of water.  It has
Title:  a sort of howdah on its back, and its distended tusked mouth into
Title:  which the billows are rolling, might be taken for the Traitors' Gate
Title:  leading from the Thames by water into the Tower.  Then, there are the
Title:  Prodromus whales of old Scotch Sibbald, and Jonah's whale, as
Title:  depicted in the prints of old Bibles and the cuts of old primers.
Title:  What shall be said of these?  As for the book-binder's whale winding
Title:  like a vine-stalk round the stock of a descending anchor--as stamped
Title:  and gilded on the backs and title-pages of many books both old and
Title:  new--that is a very picturesque but purely fabulous creature,
Title:  imitated, I take it, from the like figures on antique vases.  Though
Title:  universally denominated a dolphin, I nevertheless call this
Title:  book-binder's fish an attempt at a whale; because it was so intended
Title:  when the device was first introduced.  It was introduced by an old
Title:  Italian publisher somewhere about the 15th century, during the
Title:  Revival of Learning; and in those days, and even down to a
Title:  comparatively late period, dolphins were popularly supposed to be a
Title:  species of the Leviathan.
Title:  
Title:  In the vignettes and other embellishments of some ancient books you
Title:  will at times meet with very curious touches at the whale, where all
Title:  manner of spouts, jets d'eau, hot springs and cold, Saratoga and
Title:  Baden-Baden, come bubbling up from his unexhausted brain.  In the
Title:  title-page of the original edition of the "Advancement of Learning"
Title:  you will find some curious whales.
Title:  
Title:  But quitting all these unprofessional attempts, let us glance at
Title:  those pictures of leviathan purporting to be sober, scientific
Title:  delineations, by those who know.  In old Harris's collection of
Title:  voyages there are some plates of whales extracted from a Dutch book
Title:  of voyages, A.D. 1671, entitled "A Whaling Voyage to Spitzbergen in
Title:  the ship Jonas in the Whale, Peter Peterson of Friesland, master."
Title:  In one of those plates the whales, like great rafts of logs, are
Title:  represented lying among ice-isles, with white bears running over
Title:  their living backs.  In another plate, the prodigious blunder is made
Title:  of representing the whale with perpendicular flukes.
Title:  
Title:  Then again, there is an imposing quarto, written by one Captain
Title:  Colnett, a Post Captain in the English navy, entitled "A Voyage round
Title:  Cape Horn into the South Seas, for the purpose of extending the
Title:  Spermaceti Whale Fisheries."  In this book is an outline purporting
Title:  to be a "Picture of a Physeter or Spermaceti whale, drawn by scale
Title:  from one killed on the coast of Mexico, August, 1793, and hoisted on
Title:  deck."  I doubt not the captain had this veracious picture taken for
Title:  the benefit of his marines.  To mention but one thing about it, let
Title:  me say that it has an eye which applied, according to the
Title:  accompanying scale, to a full grown sperm whale, would make the eye
Title:  of that whale a bow-window some five feet long.  Ah, my gallant
Title:  captain, why did ye not give us Jonah looking out of that eye!
Title:  
Title:  Nor are the most conscientious compilations of Natural History for
Title:  the benefit of the young and tender, free from the same heinousness
Title:  of mistake.  Look at that popular work "Goldsmith's Animated Nature."
Title:  In the abridged London edition of 1807, there are plates of an
Title:  alleged "whale" and a "narwhale."  I do not wish to seem inelegant,
Title:  but this unsightly whale looks much like an amputated sow; and, as
Title:  for the narwhale, one glimpse at it is enough to amaze one, that in
Title:  this nineteenth century such a hippogriff could be palmed for genuine
Title:  upon any intelligent public of schoolboys.
Title:  
Title:  Then, again, in 1825, Bernard Germain, Count de Lacepede, a great
Title:  naturalist, published a scientific systemized whale book, wherein are
Title:  several pictures of the different species of the Leviathan.  All
Title:  these are not only incorrect, but the picture of the Mysticetus or
Title:  Greenland whale (that is to say, the Right whale), even Scoresby, a
Title:  long experienced man as touching that species, declares not to have
Title:  its counterpart in nature.
Title:  
Title:  But the placing of the cap-sheaf to all this blundering business was
Title:  reserved for the scientific Frederick Cuvier, brother to the famous
Title:  Baron.  In 1836, he published a Natural History of Whales, in which
Title:  he gives what he calls a picture of the Sperm Whale.  Before showing
Title:  that picture to any Nantucketer, you had best provide for your
Title:  summary retreat from Nantucket.  In a word, Frederick Cuvier's Sperm
Title:  Whale is not a Sperm Whale, but a squash.  Of course, he never had
Title:  the benefit of a whaling voyage (such men seldom have), but whence he
Title:  derived that picture, who can tell?  Perhaps he got it as his
Title:  scientific predecessor in the same field, Desmarest, got one of his
Title:  authentic abortions; that is, from a Chinese drawing.  And what sort
Title:  of lively lads with the pencil those Chinese are, many queer cups and
Title:  saucers inform us.
Title:  
Title:  As for the sign-painters' whales seen in the streets hanging over the
Title:  shops of oil-dealers, what shall be said of them?  They are generally
Title:  Richard III. whales, with dromedary humps, and very savage;
Title:  breakfasting on three or four sailor tarts, that is whaleboats full
Title:  of mariners: their deformities floundering in seas of blood and blue
Title:  paint.
Title:  
Title:  But these manifold mistakes in depicting the whale are not so very
Title:  surprising after all.  Consider!  Most of the scientific drawings
Title:  have been taken from the stranded fish; and these are about as
Title:  correct as a drawing of a wrecked ship, with broken back, would
Title:  correctly represent the noble animal itself in all its undashed pride
Title:  of hull and spars.  Though elephants have stood for their
Title:  full-lengths, the living Leviathan has never yet fairly floated
Title:  himself for his portrait.  The living whale, in his full majesty and
Title:  significance, is only to be seen at sea in unfathomable waters; and
Title:  afloat the vast bulk of him is out of sight, like a launched
Title:  line-of-battle ship; and out of that element it is a thing eternally
Title:  impossible for mortal man to hoist him bodily into the air, so as to
Title:  preserve all his mighty swells and undulations.  And, not to speak of
Title:  the highly presumable difference of contour between a young sucking
Title:  whale and a full-grown Platonian Leviathan; yet, even in the case of
Title:  one of those young sucking whales hoisted to a ship's deck, such is
Title:  then the outlandish, eel-like, limbered, varying shape of him, that
Title:  his precise expression the devil himself could not catch.
Title:  
Title:  But it may be fancied, that from the naked skeleton of the stranded
Title:  whale, accurate hints may be derived touching his true form.  Not at
Title:  all.  For it is one of the more curious things about this Leviathan,
Title:  that his skeleton gives very little idea of his general shape.
Title:  Though Jeremy Bentham's skeleton, which hangs for candelabra in the
Title:  library of one of his executors, correctly conveys the idea of a
Title:  burly-browed utilitarian old gentleman, with all Jeremy's other
Title:  leading personal characteristics; yet nothing of this kind could be
Title:  inferred from any leviathan's articulated bones.  In fact, as the
Title:  great Hunter says, the mere skeleton of the whale bears the same
Title:  relation to the fully invested and padded animal as the insect does
Title:  to the chrysalis that so roundingly envelopes it.  This peculiarity
Title:  is strikingly evinced in the head, as in some part of this book will
Title:  be incidentally shown.  It is also very curiously displayed in the
Title:  side fin, the bones of which almost exactly answer to the bones of the
Title:  human hand, minus only the thumb.  This fin has four regular
Title:  bone-fingers, the index, middle, ring, and little finger.  But all
Title:  these are permanently lodged in their fleshy covering, as the human
Title:  fingers in an artificial covering.  "However recklessly the whale may
Title:  sometimes serve us," said humorous Stubb one day, "he can never be
Title:  truly said to handle us without mittens."
Title:  
Title:  For all these reasons, then, any way you may look at it, you must
Title:  needs conclude that the great Leviathan is that one creature in the
Title:  world which must remain unpainted to the last.  True, one portrait
Title:  may hit the mark much nearer than another, but none can hit it with
Title:  any very considerable degree of exactness.  So there is no earthly
Title:  way of finding out precisely what the whale really looks like.  And
Title:  the only mode in which you can derive even a tolerable idea of his
Title:  living contour, is by going a whaling yourself; but by so doing, you
Title:  run no small risk of being eternally stove and sunk by him.
Title:  Wherefore, it seems to me you had best not be too fastidious in your
Title:  curiosity touching this Leviathan.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 56
Title:  
Title:  Of the Less Erroneous Pictures of Whales, and the True Pictures of
Title:  Whaling Scenes.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  In connexion with the monstrous pictures of whales, I am strongly
Title:  tempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous stories of them
Title:  which are to be found in certain books, both ancient and modern,
Title:  especially in Pliny, Purchas, Hackluyt, Harris, Cuvier, etc.  But I
Title:  pass that matter by.
Title:  
Title:  I know of only four published outlines of the great Sperm Whale;
Title:  Colnett's, Huggins's, Frederick Cuvier's, and Beale's.  In the
Title:  previous chapter Colnett and Cuvier have been referred to.  Huggins's
Title:  is far better than theirs; but, by great odds, Beale's is the best.
Title:  All Beale's drawings of this whale are good, excepting the middle
Title:  figure in the picture of three whales in various attitudes, capping
Title:  his second chapter.  His frontispiece, boats attacking Sperm Whales,
Title:  though no doubt calculated to excite the civil scepticism of some
Title:  parlor men, is admirably correct and life-like in its general effect.
Title:  Some of the Sperm Whale drawings in J.  Ross Browne are pretty
Title:  correct in contour; but they are wretchedly engraved.  That is not
Title:  his fault though.
Title:  
Title:  Of the Right Whale, the best outline pictures are in Scoresby; but
Title:  they are drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable impression.
Title:  He has but one picture of whaling scenes, and this is a sad
Title:  deficiency, because it is by such pictures only, when at all well
Title:  done, that you can derive anything like a truthful idea of the living
Title:  whale as seen by his living hunters.
Title:  
Title:  But, taken for all in all, by far the finest, though in some details
Title:  not the most correct, presentations of whales and whaling scenes to
Title:  be anywhere found, are two large French engravings, well executed,
Title:  and taken from paintings by one Garnery.  Respectively, they
Title:  represent attacks on the Sperm and Right Whale.  In the first
Title:  engraving a noble Sperm Whale is depicted in full majesty of might,
Title:  just risen beneath the boat from the profundities of the ocean, and
Title:  bearing high in the air upon his back the terrific wreck of the
Title:  stoven planks.  The prow of the boat is partially unbroken, and is
Title:  drawn just balancing upon the monster's spine; and standing in that
Title:  prow, for that one single incomputable flash of time, you behold an
Title:  oarsman, half shrouded by the incensed boiling spout of the whale,
Title:  and in the act of leaping, as if from a precipice.  The action of the
Title:  whole thing is wonderfully good and true.  The half-emptied line-tub
Title:  floats on the whitened sea; the wooden poles of the spilled harpoons
Title:  obliquely bob in it; the heads of the swimming crew are scattered
Title:  about the whale in contrasting expressions of affright; while in the
Title:  black stormy distance the ship is bearing down upon the scene.
Title:  Serious fault might be found with the anatomical details of this
Title:  whale, but let that pass; since, for the life of me, I could not draw
Title:  so good a one.
Title:  
Title:  In the second engraving, the boat is in the act of drawing alongside
Title:  the barnacled flank of a large running Right Whale, that rolls his
Title:  black weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from the
Title:  Patagonian cliffs.  His jets are erect, full, and black like soot; so
Title:  that from so abounding a smoke in the chimney, you would think there
Title:  must be a brave supper cooking in the great bowels below.  Sea fowls
Title:  are pecking at the small crabs, shell-fish, and other sea candies and
Title:  maccaroni, which the Right Whale sometimes carries on his pestilent
Title:  back.  And all the while the thick-lipped leviathan is rushing
Title:  through the deep, leaving tons of tumultuous white curds in his wake,
Title:  and causing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a skiff caught
Title:  nigh the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer.  Thus, the foreground is
Title:  all raging commotion; but behind, in admirable artistic contrast, is
Title:  the glassy level of a sea becalmed, the drooping unstarched sails of
Title:  the powerless ship, and the inert mass of a dead whale, a conquered
Title:  fortress, with the flag of capture lazily hanging from the whale-pole
Title:  inserted into his spout-hole.
Title:  
Title:  Who Garnery the painter is, or was, I know not.  But my life for it
Title:  he was either practically conversant with his subject, or else
Title:  marvellously tutored by some experienced whaleman.  The French are
Title:  the lads for painting action.  Go and gaze upon all the paintings of
Title:  Europe, and where will you find such a gallery of living and
Title:  breathing commotion on canvas, as in that triumphal hall at
Title:  Versailles; where the beholder fights his way, pell-mell, through the
Title:  consecutive great battles of France; where every sword seems a flash
Title:  of the Northern Lights, and the successive armed kings and Emperors
Title:  dash by, like a charge of crowned centaurs?  Not wholly unworthy of a
Title:  place in that gallery, are these sea battle-pieces of Garnery.
Title:  
Title:  The natural aptitude of the French for seizing the picturesqueness of
Title:  things seems to be peculiarly evinced in what paintings and
Title:  engravings they have of their whaling scenes.  With not one tenth of
Title:  England's experience in the fishery, and not the thousandth part of
Title:  that of the Americans, they have nevertheless furnished both nations
Title:  with the only finished sketches at all capable of conveying the real
Title:  spirit of the whale hunt.  For the most part, the English and
Title:  American whale draughtsmen seem entirely content with presenting the
Title:  mechanical outline of things, such as the vacant profile of the
Title:  whale; which, so far as picturesqueness of effect is concerned, is
Title:  about tantamount to sketching the profile of a pyramid.  Even
Title:  Scoresby, the justly renowned Right whaleman, after giving us a stiff
Title:  full length of the Greenland whale, and three or four delicate
Title:  miniatures of narwhales and porpoises, treats us to a series of
Title:  classical engravings of boat hooks, chopping knives, and grapnels;
Title:  and with the microscopic diligence of a Leuwenhoeck submits to the
Title:  inspection of a shivering world ninety-six fac-similes of magnified
Title:  Arctic snow crystals.  I mean no disparagement to the excellent
Title:  voyager (I honour him for a veteran), but in so important a matter it
Title:  was certainly an oversight not to have procured for every crystal a
Title:  sworn affidavit taken before a Greenland Justice of the Peace.
Title:  
Title:  In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery, there are two
Title:  other French engravings worthy of note, by some one who subscribes
Title:  himself "H.  Durand."  One of them, though not precisely adapted to
Title:  our present purpose, nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts.
Title:  It is a quiet noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific; a French
Title:  whaler anchored, inshore, in a calm, and lazily taking water on
Title:  board; the loosened sails of the ship, and the long leaves of the
Title:  palms in the background, both drooping together in the breezeless
Title:  air.  The effect is very fine, when considered with reference to its
Title:  presenting the hardy fishermen under one of their few aspects of
Title:  oriental repose.  The other engraving is quite a different affair:
Title:  the ship hove-to upon the open sea, and in the very heart of the
Title:  Leviathanic life, with a Right Whale alongside; the vessel (in the
Title:  act of cutting-in) hove over to the monster as if to a quay; and a
Title:  boat, hurriedly pushing off from this scene of activity, is about
Title:  giving chase to whales in the distance.  The harpoons and lances lie
Title:  levelled for use; three oarsmen are just setting the mast in its
Title:  hole; while from a sudden roll of the sea, the little craft stands
Title:  half-erect out of the water, like a rearing horse.  From the ship,
Title:  the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is going up like the
Title:  smoke over a village of smithies; and to windward, a black cloud,
Title:  rising up with earnest of squalls and rains, seems to quicken the
Title:  activity of the excited seamen.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 57
Title:  
Title:  Of Whales in Paint; in Teeth; in Wood; in Sheet-Iron; in Stone; in
Title:  Mountains; in Stars.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  On Tower-hill, as you go down to the London docks, you may have seen
Title:  a crippled beggar (or KEDGER, as the sailors say) holding a painted
Title:  board before him, representing the tragic scene in which he lost his
Title:  leg.  There are three whales and three boats; and one of the boats
Title:  (presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity)
Title:  is being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale.  Any time these
Title:  ten years, they tell me, has that man held up that picture, and
Title:  exhibited that stump to an incredulous world.  But the time of his
Title:  justification has now come.  His three whales are as good whales as
Title:  were ever published in Wapping, at any rate; and his stump as
Title:  unquestionable a stump as any you will find in the western clearings.
Title:  But, though for ever mounted on that stump, never a stump-speech
Title:  does the poor whaleman make; but, with downcast eyes, stands ruefully
Title:  contemplating his own amputation.
Title:  
Title:  Throughout the Pacific, and also in Nantucket, and New Bedford, and
Title:  Sag Harbor, you will come across lively sketches of whales and
Title:  whaling-scenes, graven by the fishermen themselves on Sperm
Title:  Whale-teeth, or ladies' busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone,
Title:  and other like skrimshander articles, as the whalemen call the
Title:  numerous little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out of
Title:  the rough material, in their hours of ocean leisure.  Some of them
Title:  have little boxes of dentistical-looking implements, specially
Title:  intended for the skrimshandering business.  But, in general, they
Title:  toil with their jack-knives alone; and, with that almost omnipotent
Title:  tool of the sailor, they will turn you out anything you please, in
Title:  the way of a mariner's fancy.
Title:  
Title:  Long exile from Christendom and civilization inevitably restores a
Title:  man to that condition in which God placed him, i.e. what is called
Title:  savagery.  Your true whale-hunter is as much a savage as an Iroquois.
Title:  I myself am a savage, owning no allegiance but to the King of the
Title:  Cannibals; and ready at any moment to rebel against him.
Title:  
Title:  Now, one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in his
Title:  domestic hours, is his wonderful patience of industry.  An ancient
Title:  Hawaiian war-club or spear-paddle, in its full multiplicity and
Title:  elaboration of carving, is as great a trophy of human perseverance as
Title:  a Latin lexicon.  For, with but a bit of broken sea-shell or a
Title:  shark's tooth, that miraculous intricacy of wooden net-work has been
Title:  achieved; and it has cost steady years of steady application.
Title:  
Title:  As with the Hawaiian savage, so with the white sailor-savage.  With
Title:  the same marvellous patience, and with the same single shark's tooth,
Title:  of his one poor jack-knife, he will carve you a bit of bone
Title:  sculpture, not quite as workmanlike, but as close packed in its
Title:  maziness of design, as the Greek savage, Achilles's shield; and full
Title:  of barbaric spirit and suggestiveness, as the prints of that fine old
Title:  Dutch savage, Albert Durer.
Title:  
Title:  Wooden whales, or whales cut in profile out of the small dark slabs
Title:  of the noble South Sea war-wood, are frequently met with in the
Title:  forecastles of American whalers.  Some of them are done with much
Title:  accuracy.
Title:  
Title:  At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whales
Title:  hung by the tail for knockers to the road-side door.  When the porter
Title:  is sleepy, the anvil-headed whale would be best.  But these knocking
Title:  whales are seldom remarkable as faithful essays.  On the spires of
Title:  some old-fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed
Title:  there for weather-cocks; but they are so elevated, and besides that
Title:  are to all intents and purposes so labelled with "HANDS OFF!" you
Title:  cannot examine them closely enough to decide upon their merit.
Title:  
Title:  In bony, ribby regions of the earth, where at the base of high broken
Title:  cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon the
Title:  plain, you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of
Title:  the Leviathan partly merged in grass, which of a windy day breaks
Title:  against them in a surf of green surges.
Title:  
Title:  Then, again, in mountainous countries where the traveller is
Title:  continually girdled by amphitheatrical heights; here and there from
Title:  some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of the
Title:  profiles of whales defined along the undulating ridges.  But you must
Title:  be a thorough whaleman, to see these sights; and not only that, but
Title:  if you wish to return to such a sight again, you must be sure and
Title:  take the exact intersecting latitude and longitude of your first
Title:  stand-point, else so chance-like are such observations of the hills,
Title:  that your precise, previous stand-point would require a laborious
Title:  re-discovery; like the Soloma Islands, which still remain incognita,
Title:  though once high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera
Title:  chronicled them.
Title:  
Title:  Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject, can you fail to trace
Title:  out great whales in the starry heavens, and boats in pursuit of them;
Title:  as when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern nations saw
Title:  armies locked in battle among the clouds.  Thus at the North have I
Title:  chased Leviathan round and round the Pole with the revolutions of the
Title:  bright points that first defined him to me.  And beneath the
Title:  effulgent Antarctic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis, and joined
Title:  the chase against the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of
Title:  Hydrus and the Flying Fish.
Title:  
Title:  With a frigate's anchors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of harpoons
Title:  for spurs, would I could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies,
Title:  to see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tents
Title:  really lie encamped beyond my mortal sight!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 58
Title:  
Title:  Brit.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Steering north-eastward from the Crozetts, we fell in with vast
Title:  meadows of brit, the minute, yellow substance, upon which the Right
Title:  Whale largely feeds.  For leagues and leagues it undulated round us,
Title:  so that we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe and
Title:  golden wheat.
Title:  
Title:  On the second day, numbers of Right Whales were seen, who, secure
Title:  from the attack of a Sperm Whaler like the Pequod, with open jaws
Title:  sluggishly swam through the brit, which, adhering to the fringing
Title:  fibres of that wondrous Venetian blind in their mouths, was in that
Title:  manner separated from the water that escaped at the lip.
Title:  
Title:  As morning mowers, who side by side slowly and seethingly advance
Title:  their scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads; even so
Title:  these monsters swam, making a strange, grassy, cutting sound; and
Title:  leaving behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *That part of the sea known among whalemen as the "Brazil Banks" does
Title:  not bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do, because of there
Title:  being shallows and soundings there, but because of this remarkable
Title:  meadow-like appearance, caused by the vast drifts of brit continually
Title:  floating in those latitudes, where the Right Whale is often chased.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at
Title:  all reminded one of mowers.  Seen from the mast-heads, especially
Title:  when they paused and were stationary for a while, their vast black
Title:  forms looked more like lifeless masses of rock than anything else.
Title:  And as in the great hunting countries of India, the stranger at a
Title:  distance will sometimes pass on the plains recumbent elephants
Title:  without knowing them to be such, taking them for bare, blackened
Title:  elevations of the soil; even so, often, with him, who for the first
Title:  time beholds this species of the leviathans of the sea.  And even
Title:  when recognised at last, their immense magnitude renders it very
Title:  hard really to believe that such bulky masses of overgrowth can
Title:  possibly be instinct, in all parts, with the same sort of life that
Title:  lives in a dog or a horse.
Title:  
Title:  Indeed, in other respects, you can hardly regard any creatures of the
Title:  deep with the same feelings that you do those of the shore.  For
Title:  though some old naturalists have maintained that all creatures of the
Title:  land are of their kind in the sea; and though taking a broad general
Title:  view of the thing, this may very well be; yet coming to specialties,
Title:  where, for example, does the ocean furnish any fish that in
Title:  disposition answers to the sagacious kindness of the dog?  The
Title:  accursed shark alone can in any generic respect be said to bear
Title:  comparative analogy to him.
Title:  
Title:  But though, to landsmen in general, the native inhabitants of the
Title:  seas have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial and
Title:  repelling; though we know the sea to be an everlasting terra
Title:  incognita, so that Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to
Title:  discover his one superficial western one; though, by vast odds, the
Title:  most terrific of all mortal disasters have immemorially and
Title:  indiscriminately befallen tens and hundreds of thousands of those who
Title:  have gone upon the waters; though but a moment's consideration will
Title:  teach, that however baby man may brag of his science and skill, and
Title:  however much, in a flattering future, that science and skill may
Title:  augment; yet for ever and for ever, to the crack of doom, the sea
Title:  will insult and murder him, and pulverize the stateliest, stiffest
Title:  frigate he can make; nevertheless, by the continual repetition of
Title:  these very impressions, man has lost that sense of the full awfulness
Title:  of the sea which aboriginally belongs to it.
Title:  
Title:  The first boat we read of, floated on an ocean, that with Portuguese
Title:  vengeance had whelmed a whole world without leaving so much as a
Title:  widow.  That same ocean rolls now; that same ocean destroyed the
Title:  wrecked ships of last year.  Yea, foolish mortals, Noah's flood is
Title:  not yet subsided; two thirds of the fair world it yet covers.
Title:  
Title:  Wherein differ the sea and the land, that a miracle upon one is not a
Title:  miracle upon the other?  Preternatural terrors rested upon the
Title:  Hebrews, when under the feet of Korah and his company the live ground
Title:  opened and swallowed them up for ever; yet not a modern sun ever
Title:  sets, but in precisely the same manner the live sea swallows up ships
Title:  and crews.
Title:  
Title:  But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien to it, but
Title:  it is also a fiend to its own off-spring; worse than the Persian host
Title:  who murdered his own guests; sparing not the creatures which itself
Title:  hath spawned.  Like a savage tigress that tossing in the jungle
Title:  overlays her own cubs, so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales
Title:  against the rocks, and leaves them there side by side with the split
Title:  wrecks of ships.  No mercy, no power but its own controls it.
Title:  Panting and snorting like a mad battle steed that has lost its rider,
Title:  the masterless ocean overruns the globe.
Title:  
Title:  Consider the subtleness of the sea; how its most dreaded creatures
Title:  glide under water, unapparent for the most part, and treacherously
Title:  hidden beneath the loveliest tints of azure.  Consider also the
Title:  devilish brilliance and beauty of many of its most remorseless
Title:  tribes, as the dainty embellished shape of many species of sharks.
Title:  Consider, once more, the universal cannibalism of the sea; all whose
Title:  creatures prey upon each other, carrying on eternal war since the
Title:  world began.
Title:  
Title:  Consider all this; and then turn to this green, gentle, and most
Title:  docile earth; consider them both, the sea and the land; and do you
Title:  not find a strange analogy to something in yourself?  For as this
Title:  appalling ocean surrounds the verdant land, so in the soul of man
Title:  there lies one insular Tahiti, full of peace and joy, but encompassed
Title:  by all the horrors of the half known life.  God keep thee!  Push not
Title:  off from that isle, thou canst never return!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 59
Title:  
Title:  Squid.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Slowly wading through the meadows of brit, the Pequod still held on
Title:  her way north-eastward towards the island of Java; a gentle air
Title:  impelling her keel, so that in the surrounding serenity her three
Title:  tall tapering masts mildly waved to that languid breeze, as three
Title:  mild palms on a plain.  And still, at wide intervals in the silvery
Title:  night, the lonely, alluring jet would be seen.
Title:  
Title:  But one transparent blue morning, when a stillness almost
Title:  preternatural spread over the sea, however unattended with any
Title:  stagnant calm; when the long burnished sun-glade on the waters seemed
Title:  a golden finger laid across them, enjoining some secrecy; when the
Title:  slippered waves whispered together as they softly ran on; in this
Title:  profound hush of the visible sphere a strange spectre was seen by
Title:  Daggoo from the main-mast-head.
Title:  
Title:  In the distance, a great white mass lazily rose, and rising higher
Title:  and higher, and disentangling itself from the azure, at last gleamed
Title:  before our prow like a snow-slide, new slid from the hills.  Thus
Title:  glistening for a moment, as slowly it subsided, and sank.  Then once
Title:  more arose, and silently gleamed.  It seemed not a whale; and yet is
Title:  this Moby Dick? thought Daggoo.  Again the phantom went down, but on
Title:  re-appearing once more, with a stiletto-like cry that startled every
Title:  man from his nod, the negro yelled out--"There! there again! there
Title:  she breaches! right ahead!  The White Whale, the White Whale!"
Title:  
Title:  Upon this, the seamen rushed to the yard-arms, as in swarming-time
Title:  the bees rush to the boughs.  Bare-headed in the sultry sun, Ahab
Title:  stood on the bowsprit, and with one hand pushed far behind in
Title:  readiness to wave his orders to the helmsman, cast his eager glance
Title:  in the direction indicated aloft by the outstretched motionless arm
Title:  of Daggoo.
Title:  
Title:  Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and solitary jet had
Title:  gradually worked upon Ahab, so that he was now prepared to connect
Title:  the ideas of mildness and repose with the first sight of the
Title:  particular whale he pursued; however this was, or whether his
Title:  eagerness betrayed him; whichever way it might have been, no sooner
Title:  did he distinctly perceive the white mass, than with a quick
Title:  intensity he instantly gave orders for lowering.
Title:  
Title:  The four boats were soon on the water; Ahab's in advance, and all
Title:  swiftly pulling towards their prey.  Soon it went down, and while,
Title:  with oars suspended, we were awaiting its reappearance, lo! in the
Title:  same spot where it sank, once more it slowly rose.  Almost forgetting
Title:  for the moment all thoughts of Moby Dick, we now gazed at the most
Title:  wondrous phenomenon which the secret seas have hitherto revealed to
Title:  mankind.  A vast pulpy mass, furlongs in length and breadth, of a
Title:  glancing cream-colour, lay floating on the water, innumerable long
Title:  arms radiating from its centre, and curling and twisting like a nest
Title:  of anacondas, as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object within
Title:  reach.  No perceptible face or front did it have; no conceivable
Title:  token of either sensation or instinct; but undulated there on the
Title:  billows, an unearthly, formless, chance-like apparition of life.
Title:  
Title:  As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again, Starbuck
Title:  still gazing at the agitated waters where it had sunk, with a wild
Title:  voice exclaimed--"Almost rather had I seen Moby Dick and fought him,
Title:  than to have seen thee, thou white ghost!"
Title:  
Title:  "What was it, Sir?" said Flask.
Title:  
Title:  "The great live squid, which, they say, few whale-ships ever beheld,
Title:  and returned to their ports to tell of it."
Title:  
Title:  But Ahab said nothing; turning his boat, he sailed back to the
Title:  vessel; the rest as silently following.
Title:  
Title:  Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general have connected
Title:  with the sight of this object, certain it is, that a glimpse of it
Title:  being so very unusual, that circumstance has gone far to invest it
Title:  with portentousness.  So rarely is it beheld, that though one and all
Title:  of them declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean, yet
Title:  very few of them have any but the most vague ideas concerning its
Title:  true nature and form; notwithstanding, they believe it to furnish to
Title:  the sperm whale his only food.  For though other species of whales
Title:  find their food above water, and may be seen by man in the act of
Title:  feeding, the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones
Title:  below the surface; and only by inference is it that any one can tell
Title:  of what, precisely, that food consists.  At times, when closely
Title:  pursued, he will disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms
Title:  of the squid; some of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty
Title:  feet in length.  They fancy that the monster to which these arms
Title:  belonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed of the ocean; and that
Title:  the sperm whale, unlike other species, is supplied with teeth in
Title:  order to attack and tear it.
Title:  
Title:  There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of Bishop
Title:  Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid.  The manner in
Title:  which the Bishop describes it, as alternately rising and sinking,
Title:  with some other particulars he narrates, in all this the two
Title:  correspond.  But much abatement is necessary with respect to the
Title:  incredible bulk he assigns it.
Title:  
Title:  By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysterious
Title:  creature, here spoken of, it is included among the class of
Title:  cuttle-fish, to which, indeed, in certain external respects it would
Title:  seem to belong, but only as the Anak of the tribe.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 60
Title:  
Title:  The Line.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  With reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described, as well
Title:  as for the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewhere
Title:  presented, I have here to speak of the magical, sometimes horrible
Title:  whale-line.
Title:  
Title:  The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp,
Title:  slightly vapoured with tar, not impregnated with it, as in the case of
Title:  ordinary ropes; for while tar, as ordinarily used, makes the hemp
Title:  more pliable to the rope-maker, and also renders the rope itself more
Title:  convenient to the sailor for common ship use; yet, not only would the
Title:  ordinary quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close
Title:  coiling to which it must be subjected; but as most seamen are
Title:  beginning to learn, tar in general by no means adds to the rope's
Title:  durability or strength, however much it may give it compactness and
Title:  gloss.
Title:  
Title:  Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American fishery almost
Title:  entirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines; for, though
Title:  not so durable as hemp, it is stronger, and far more soft and
Title:  elastic; and I will add (since there is an aesthetics in all things),
Title:  is much more handsome and becoming to the boat, than hemp.  Hemp is a
Title:  dusky, dark fellow, a sort of Indian; but Manilla is as a
Title:  golden-haired Circassian to behold.
Title:  
Title:  The whale-line is only two-thirds of an inch in thickness.  At first
Title:  sight, you would not think it so strong as it really is.  By
Title:  experiment its one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight of one
Title:  hundred and twenty pounds; so that the whole rope will bear a strain
Title:  nearly equal to three tons.  In length, the common sperm whale-line
Title:  measures something over two hundred fathoms.  Towards the stern of
Title:  the boat it is spirally coiled away in the tub, not like the
Title:  worm-pipe of a still though, but so as to form one round,
Title:  cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded "sheaves," or layers of
Title:  concentric spiralizations, without any hollow but the "heart," or
Title:  minute vertical tube formed at the axis of the cheese.  As the least
Title:  tangle or kink in the coiling would, in running out, infallibly take
Title:  somebody's arm, leg, or entire body off, the utmost precaution is
Title:  used in stowing the line in its tub.  Some harpooneers will consume
Title:  almost an entire morning in this business, carrying the line high
Title:  aloft and then reeving it downwards through a block towards the tub,
Title:  so as in the act of coiling to free it from all possible wrinkles and
Title:  twists.
Title:  
Title:  In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one; the same line
Title:  being continuously coiled in both tubs.  There is some advantage in
Title:  this; because these twin-tubs being so small they fit more readily
Title:  into the boat, and do not strain it so much; whereas, the American
Title:  tub, nearly three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth, makes
Title:  a rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but one half-inch
Title:  in thickness; for the bottom of the whale-boat is like critical ice,
Title:  which will bear up a considerable distributed weight, but not very
Title:  much of a concentrated one.  When the painted canvas cover is clapped
Title:  on the American line-tub, the boat looks as if it were pulling off
Title:  with a prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the whales.
Title:  
Title:  Both ends of the line are exposed; the lower end terminating in an
Title:  eye-splice or loop coming up from the bottom against the side of the
Title:  tub, and hanging over its edge completely disengaged from everything.
Title:  This arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts.
Title:  First: In order to facilitate the fastening to it of an additional
Title:  line from a neighboring boat, in case the stricken whale should sound
Title:  so deep as to threaten to carry off the entire line originally
Title:  attached to the harpoon.  In these instances, the whale of course is
Title:  shifted like a mug of ale, as it were, from the one boat to the
Title:  other; though the first boat always hovers at hand to assist its
Title:  consort.  Second: This arrangement is indispensable for common
Title:  safety's sake; for were the lower end of the line in any way attached
Title:  to the boat, and were the whale then to run the line out to the end
Title:  almost in a single, smoking minute as he sometimes does, he would not
Title:  stop there, for the doomed boat would infallibly be dragged down
Title:  after him into the profundity of the sea; and in that case no
Title:  town-crier would ever find her again.
Title:  
Title:  Before lowering the boat for the chase, the upper end of the line is
Title:  taken aft from the tub, and passing round the loggerhead there, is
Title:  again carried forward the entire length of the boat, resting
Title:  crosswise upon the loom or handle of every man's oar, so that it jogs
Title:  against his wrist in rowing; and also passing between the men, as
Title:  they alternately sit at the opposite gunwales, to the leaded chocks
Title:  or grooves in the extreme pointed prow of the boat, where a wooden
Title:  pin or skewer the size of a common quill, prevents it from slipping
Title:  out.  From the chocks it hangs in a slight festoon over the bows, and
Title:  is then passed inside the boat again; and some ten or twenty fathoms
Title:  (called box-line) being coiled upon the box in the bows, it continues
Title:  its way to the gunwale still a little further aft, and is then
Title:  attached to the short-warp--the rope which is immediately connected
Title:  with the harpoon; but previous to that connexion, the short-warp goes
Title:  through sundry mystifications too tedious to detail.
Title:  
Title:  Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its complicated coils,
Title:  twisting and writhing around it in almost every direction.  All the
Title:  oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions; so that to the
Title:  timid eye of the landsman, they seem as Indian jugglers, with the
Title:  deadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs.  Nor can any son
Title:  of mortal woman, for the first time, seat himself amid those hempen
Title:  intricacies, and while straining his utmost at the oar, bethink him
Title:  that at any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted, and all these
Title:  horrible contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings; he cannot
Title:  be thus circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in
Title:  his bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly.  Yet habit--strange
Title:  thing! what cannot habit accomplish?--Gayer sallies, more merry
Title:  mirth, better jokes, and brighter repartees, you never heard over
Title:  your mahogany, than you will hear over the half-inch white cedar of
Title:  the whale-boat, when thus hung in hangman's nooses; and, like the six
Title:  burghers of Calais before King Edward, the six men composing the crew
Title:  pull into the jaws of death, with a halter around every neck, as you
Title:  may say.
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account for
Title:  those repeated whaling disasters--some few of which are casually
Title:  chronicled--of this man or that man being taken out of the boat by
Title:  the line, and lost.  For, when the line is darting out, to be seated
Title:  then in the boat, is like being seated in the midst of the manifold
Title:  whizzings of a steam-engine in full play, when every flying beam, and
Title:  shaft, and wheel, is grazing you.  It is worse; for you cannot sit
Title:  motionless in the heart of these perils, because the boat is rocking
Title:  like a cradle, and you are pitched one way and the other, without the
Title:  slightest warning; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and
Title:  simultaneousness of volition and action, can you escape being made a
Title:  Mazeppa of, and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself could
Title:  never pierce you out.
Title:  
Title:  Again: as the profound calm which only apparently precedes and
Title:  prophesies of the storm, is perhaps more awful than the storm itself;
Title:  for, indeed, the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm;
Title:  and contains it in itself, as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the
Title:  fatal powder, and the ball, and the explosion; so the graceful repose
Title:  of the line, as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen before
Title:  being brought into actual play--this is a thing which carries more of
Title:  true terror than any other aspect of this dangerous affair.  But why
Title:  say more?  All men live enveloped in whale-lines.  All are born with
Title:  halters round their necks; but it is only when caught in the swift,
Title:  sudden turn of death, that mortals realize the silent, subtle,
Title:  ever-present perils of life.  And if you be a philosopher, though
Title:  seated in the whale-boat, you would not at heart feel one whit more
Title:  of terror, than though seated before your evening fire with a poker,
Title:  and not a harpoon, by your side.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 61
Title:  
Title:  Stubb Kills a Whale.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents,
Title:  to Queequeg it was quite a different object.
Title:  
Title:  "When you see him 'quid," said the savage, honing his harpoon in the
Title:  bow of his hoisted boat, "then you quick see him 'parm whale."
Title:  
Title:  The next day was exceedingly still and sultry, and with nothing
Title:  special to engage them, the Pequod's crew could hardly resist the
Title:  spell of sleep induced by such a vacant sea.  For this part of the
Title:  Indian Ocean through which we then were voyaging is not what whalemen
Title:  call a lively ground; that is, it affords fewer glimpses of
Title:  porpoises, dolphins, flying-fish, and other vivacious denizens of
Title:  more stirring waters, than those off the Rio de la Plata, or the
Title:  in-shore ground off Peru.
Title:  
Title:  It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head; and with my shoulders
Title:  leaning against the slackened royal shrouds, to and fro I idly swayed
Title:  in what seemed an enchanted air.  No resolution could withstand it;
Title:  in that dreamy mood losing all consciousness, at last my soul went
Title:  out of my body; though my body still continued to sway as a pendulum
Title:  will, long after the power which first moved it is withdrawn.
Title:  
Title:  Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me, I had noticed that the
Title:  seamen at the main and mizzen-mast-heads were already drowsy.  So
Title:  that at last all three of us lifelessly swung from the spars, and for
Title:  every swing that we made there was a nod from below from the
Title:  slumbering helmsman.  The waves, too, nodded their indolent crests;
Title:  and across the wide trance of the sea, east nodded to west, and the
Title:  sun over all.
Title:  
Title:  Suddenly bubbles seemed bursting beneath my closed eyes; like vices
Title:  my hands grasped the shrouds; some invisible, gracious agency
Title:  preserved me; with a shock I came back to life.  And lo! close under
Title:  our lee, not forty fathoms off, a gigantic Sperm Whale lay rolling in
Title:  the water like the capsized hull of a frigate, his broad, glossy
Title:  back, of an Ethiopian hue, glistening in the sun's rays like a
Title:  mirror.  But lazily undulating in the trough of the sea, and ever and
Title:  anon tranquilly spouting his vapoury jet, the whale looked like a
Title:  portly burgher smoking his pipe of a warm afternoon.  But that pipe,
Title:  poor whale, was thy last.  As if struck by some enchanter's wand, the
Title:  sleepy ship and every sleeper in it all at once started into
Title:  wakefulness; and more than a score of voices from all parts of the
Title:  vessel, simultaneously with the three notes from aloft, shouted forth
Title:  the accustomed cry, as the great fish slowly and regularly spouted
Title:  the sparkling brine into the air.
Title:  
Title:  "Clear away the boats!  Luff!" cried Ahab.  And obeying his own
Title:  order, he dashed the helm down before the helmsman could handle the
Title:  spokes.
Title:  
Title:  The sudden exclamations of the crew must have alarmed the whale; and
Title:  ere the boats were down, majestically turning, he swam away to the
Title:  leeward, but with such a steady tranquillity, and making so few
Title:  ripples as he swam, that thinking after all he might not as yet be
Title:  alarmed, Ahab gave orders that not an oar should be used, and no man
Title:  must speak but in whispers.  So seated like Ontario Indians on the
Title:  gunwales of the boats, we swiftly but silently paddled along; the
Title:  calm not admitting of the noiseless sails being set.  Presently, as
Title:  we thus glided in chase, the monster perpendicularly flitted his tail
Title:  forty feet into the air, and then sank out of sight like a tower
Title:  swallowed up.
Title:  
Title:  "There go flukes!" was the cry, an announcement immediately followed
Title:  by Stubb's producing his match and igniting his pipe, for now a
Title:  respite was granted.  After the full interval of his sounding had
Title:  elapsed, the whale rose again, and being now in advance of the
Title:  smoker's boat, and much nearer to it than to any of the others, Stubb
Title:  counted upon the honour of the capture.  It was obvious, now, that the
Title:  whale had at length become aware of his pursuers.  All silence of
Title:  cautiousness was therefore no longer of use.  Paddles were dropped,
Title:  and oars came loudly into play.  And still puffing at his pipe, Stubb
Title:  cheered on his crew to the assault.
Title:  
Title:  Yes, a mighty change had come over the fish.  All alive to his
Title:  jeopardy, he was going "head out"; that part obliquely projecting
Title:  from the mad yeast which he brewed.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *It will be seen in some other place of what a very light substance
Title:  the entire interior of the sperm whale's enormous head consists.
Title:  Though apparently the most massive, it is by far the most buoyant
Title:  part about him.  So that with ease he elevates it in the air, and
Title:  invariably does so when going at his utmost speed.  Besides, such is
Title:  the breadth of the upper part of the front of his head, and such the
Title:  tapering cut-water formation of the lower part, that by obliquely
Title:  elevating his head, he thereby may be said to transform himself from
Title:  a bluff-bowed sluggish galliot into a sharppointed New York
Title:  pilot-boat.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Start her, start her, my men!  Don't hurry yourselves; take plenty
Title:  of time--but start her; start her like thunder-claps, that's all,"
Title:  cried Stubb, spluttering out the smoke as he spoke.  "Start her, now;
Title:  give 'em the long and strong stroke, Tashtego.  Start her, Tash, my
Title:  boy--start her, all; but keep cool, keep cool--cucumbers is the
Title:  word--easy, easy--only start her like grim death and grinning devils,
Title:  and raise the buried dead perpendicular out of their graves,
Title:  boys--that's all.  Start her!"
Title:  
Title:  "Woo-hoo!  Wa-hee!" screamed the Gay-Header in reply, raising some
Title:  old war-whoop to the skies; as every oarsman in the strained boat
Title:  involuntarily bounced forward with the one tremendous leading stroke
Title:  which the eager Indian gave.
Title:  
Title:  But his wild screams were answered by others quite as wild.
Title:  "Kee-hee!  Kee-hee!" yelled Daggoo, straining forwards and backwards
Title:  on his seat, like a pacing tiger in his cage.
Title:  
Title:  "Ka-la!  Koo-loo!" howled Queequeg, as if smacking his lips over a
Title:  mouthful of Grenadier's steak.  And thus with oars and yells the
Title:  keels cut the sea.  Meanwhile, Stubb retaining his place in the
Title:  van, still encouraged his men to the onset, all the while puffing the
Title:  smoke from his mouth.  Like desperadoes they tugged and they
Title:  strained, till the welcome cry was heard--"Stand up, Tashtego!--give
Title:  it to him!"  The harpoon was hurled.  "Stern all!"  The oarsmen
Title:  backed water; the same moment something went hot and hissing along
Title:  every one of their wrists.  It was the magical line.  An instant
Title:  before, Stubb had swiftly caught two additional turns with it round
Title:  the loggerhead, whence, by reason of its increased rapid circlings, a
Title:  hempen blue smoke now jetted up and mingled with the steady fumes
Title:  from his pipe.  As the line passed round and round the loggerhead; so
Title:  also, just before reaching that point, it blisteringly passed through
Title:  and through both of Stubb's hands, from which the hand-cloths, or
Title:  squares of quilted canvas sometimes worn at these times, had
Title:  accidentally dropped.  It was like holding an enemy's sharp two-edged
Title:  sword by the blade, and that enemy all the time striving to wrest it
Title:  out of your clutch.
Title:  
Title:  "Wet the line! wet the line!" cried Stubb to the tub oarsman (him
Title:  seated by the tub) who, snatching off his hat, dashed sea-water into
Title:  it.*  More turns were taken, so that the line began holding its place.
Title:  The boat now flew through the boiling water like a shark all fins.
Title:  Stubb and Tashtego here changed places--stem for stern--a staggering
Title:  business truly in that rocking commotion.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *Partly to show the indispensableness of this act, it may here be
Title:  stated, that, in the old Dutch fishery, a mop was used to dash the
Title:  running line with water; in many other ships, a wooden piggin, or
Title:  bailer, is set apart for that purpose.  Your hat, however, is the
Title:  most convenient.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  From the vibrating line extending the entire length of the upper part
Title:  of the boat, and from its now being more tight than a harpstring, you
Title:  would have thought the craft had two keels--one cleaving the water,
Title:  the other the air--as the boat churned on through both opposing
Title:  elements at once.  A continual cascade played at the bows; a
Title:  ceaseless whirling eddy in her wake; and, at the slightest motion
Title:  from within, even but of a little finger, the vibrating, cracking
Title:  craft canted over her spasmodic gunwale into the sea.  Thus they
Title:  rushed; each man with might and main clinging to his seat, to prevent
Title:  being tossed to the foam; and the tall form of Tashtego at the
Title:  steering oar crouching almost double, in order to bring down his
Title:  centre of gravity.  Whole Atlantics and Pacifics seemed passed as
Title:  they shot on their way, till at length the whale somewhat slackened
Title:  his flight.
Title:  
Title:  "Haul in--haul in!" cried Stubb to the bowsman! and, facing round
Title:  towards the whale, all hands began pulling the boat up to him, while
Title:  yet the boat was being towed on.  Soon ranging up by his flank,
Title:  Stubb, firmly planting his knee in the clumsy cleat, darted dart
Title:  after dart into the flying fish; at the word of command, the boat
Title:  alternately sterning out of the way of the whale's horrible wallow,
Title:  and then ranging up for another fling.
Title:  
Title:  The red tide now poured from all sides of the monster like brooks
Title:  down a hill.  His tormented body rolled not in brine but in blood,
Title:  which bubbled and seethed for furlongs behind in their wake.  The
Title:  slanting sun playing upon this crimson pond in the sea, sent back
Title:  its reflection into every face, so that they all glowed to each other
Title:  like red men.  And all the while, jet after jet of white smoke was
Title:  agonizingly shot from the spiracle of the whale, and vehement puff
Title:  after puff from the mouth of the excited headsman; as at every dart,
Title:  hauling in upon his crooked lance (by the line attached to it), Stubb
Title:  straightened it again and again, by a few rapid blows against the
Title:  gunwale, then again and again sent it into the whale.
Title:  
Title:  "Pull up--pull up!" he now cried to the bowsman, as the waning whale
Title:  relaxed in his wrath.  "Pull up!--close to!" and the boat ranged
Title:  along the fish's flank.  When reaching far over the bow, Stubb slowly
Title:  churned his long sharp lance into the fish, and kept it there,
Title:  carefully churning and churning, as if cautiously seeking to feel
Title:  after some gold watch that the whale might have swallowed, and which
Title:  he was fearful of breaking ere he could hook it out.  But that gold
Title:  watch he sought was the innermost life of the fish.  And now it is
Title:  struck; for, starting from his trance into that unspeakable thing
Title:  called his "flurry," the monster horribly wallowed in his blood,
Title:  overwrapped himself in impenetrable, mad, boiling spray, so that the
Title:  imperilled craft, instantly dropping astern, had much ado blindly to
Title:  struggle out from that phrensied twilight into the clear air of the
Title:  day.
Title:  
Title:  And now abating in his flurry, the whale once more rolled out into
Title:  view; surging from side to side; spasmodically dilating and
Title:  contracting his spout-hole, with sharp, cracking, agonized
Title:  respirations.  At last, gush after gush of clotted red gore, as if it
Title:  had been the purple lees of red wine, shot into the frighted air; and
Title:  falling back again, ran dripping down his motionless flanks into
Title:  the sea.  His heart had burst!
Title:  
Title:  "He's dead, Mr. Stubb," said Daggoo.
Title:  
Title:  "Yes; both pipes smoked out!" and withdrawing his own from his mouth,
Title:  Stubb scattered the dead ashes over the water; and, for a moment,
Title:  stood thoughtfully eyeing the vast corpse he had made.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 62
Title:  
Title:  The Dart.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  A word concerning an incident in the last chapter.
Title:  
Title:  According to the invariable usage of the fishery, the whale-boat
Title:  pushes off from the ship, with the headsman or whale-killer as
Title:  temporary steersman, and the harpooneer or whale-fastener pulling the
Title:  foremost oar, the one known as the harpooneer-oar.  Now it needs a
Title:  strong, nervous arm to strike the first iron into the fish; for
Title:  often, in what is called a long dart, the heavy implement has to be
Title:  flung to the distance of twenty or thirty feet.  But however
Title:  prolonged and exhausting the chase, the harpooneer is expected to
Title:  pull his oar meanwhile to the uttermost; indeed, he is expected to
Title:  set an example of superhuman activity to the rest, not only by
Title:  incredible rowing, but by repeated loud and intrepid exclamations;
Title:  and what it is to keep shouting at the top of one's compass, while
Title:  all the other muscles are strained and half started--what that is
Title:  none know but those who have tried it.  For one, I cannot bawl very
Title:  heartily and work very recklessly at one and the same time.  In this
Title:  straining, bawling state, then, with his back to the fish, all at
Title:  once the exhausted harpooneer hears the exciting cry--"Stand up, and
Title:  give it to him!"  He now has to drop and secure his oar, turn round
Title:  on his centre half way, seize his harpoon from the crotch, and with
Title:  what little strength may remain, he essays to pitch it somehow into
Title:  the whale.  No wonder, taking the whole fleet of whalemen in a body,
Title:  that out of fifty fair chances for a dart, not five are successful;
Title:  no wonder that so many hapless harpooneers are madly cursed and
Title:  disrated; no wonder that some of them actually burst their
Title:  blood-vessels in the boat; no wonder that some sperm whalemen are
Title:  absent four years with four barrels; no wonder that to many ship
Title:  owners, whaling is but a losing concern; for it is the harpooneer
Title:  that makes the voyage, and if you take the breath out of his body how
Title:  can you expect to find it there when most wanted!
Title:  
Title:  Again, if the dart be successful, then at the second critical
Title:  instant, that is, when the whale starts to run, the boatheader and
Title:  harpooneer likewise start to running fore and aft, to the imminent
Title:  jeopardy of themselves and every one else.  It is then they change
Title:  places; and the headsman, the chief officer of the little craft,
Title:  takes his proper station in the bows of the boat.
Title:  
Title:  Now, I care not who maintains the contrary, but all this is both
Title:  foolish and unnecessary.  The headsman should stay in the bows from
Title:  first to last; he should both dart the harpoon and the lance, and no
Title:  rowing whatever should be expected of him, except under circumstances
Title:  obvious to any fisherman.  I know that this would sometimes involve a
Title:  slight loss of speed in the chase; but long experience in various
Title:  whalemen of more than one nation has convinced me that in the vast
Title:  majority of failures in the fishery, it has not by any means been so
Title:  much the speed of the whale as the before described exhaustion of the
Title:  harpooneer that has caused them.
Title:  
Title:  To insure the greatest efficiency in the dart, the harpooneers of
Title:  this world must start to their feet from out of idleness, and not
Title:  from out of toil.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 63
Title:  
Title:  The Crotch.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Out of the trunk, the branches grow; out of them, the twigs.  So, in
Title:  productive subjects, grow the chapters.
Title:  
Title:  The crotch alluded to on a previous page deserves independent
Title:  mention.  It is a notched stick of a peculiar form, some two feet in
Title:  length, which is perpendicularly inserted into the starboard gunwale
Title:  near the bow, for the purpose of furnishing a rest for the wooden
Title:  extremity of the harpoon, whose other naked, barbed end slopingly
Title:  projects from the prow.  Thereby the weapon is instantly at hand to
Title:  its hurler, who snatches it up as readily from its rest as a
Title:  backwoodsman swings his rifle from the wall.  It is customary to have
Title:  two harpoons reposing in the crotch, respectively called the first
Title:  and second irons.
Title:  
Title:  But these two harpoons, each by its own cord, are both connected with
Title:  the line; the object being this: to dart them both, if possible, one
Title:  instantly after the other into the same whale; so that if, in the
Title:  coming drag, one should draw out, the other may still retain a hold.
Title:  It is a doubling of the chances.  But it very often happens that
Title:  owing to the instantaneous, violent, convulsive running of the whale
Title:  upon receiving the first iron, it becomes impossible for the
Title:  harpooneer, however lightning-like in his movements, to pitch the
Title:  second iron into him.  Nevertheless, as the second iron is already
Title:  connected with the line, and the line is running, hence that weapon
Title:  must, at all events, be anticipatingly tossed out of the boat,
Title:  somehow and somewhere; else the most terrible jeopardy would involve
Title:  all hands.  Tumbled into the water, it accordingly is in such cases;
Title:  the spare coils of box line (mentioned in a preceding chapter) making
Title:  this feat, in most instances, prudently practicable.  But this
Title:  critical act is not always unattended with the saddest and most fatal
Title:  casualties.
Title:  
Title:  Furthermore: you must know that when the second iron is thrown
Title:  overboard, it thenceforth becomes a dangling, sharp-edged terror,
Title:  skittishly curvetting about both boat and whale, entangling the
Title:  lines, or cutting them, and making a prodigious sensation in all
Title:  directions.  Nor, in general, is it possible to secure it again until
Title:  the whale is fairly captured and a corpse.
Title:  
Title:  Consider, now, how it must be in the case of four boats all engaging
Title:  one unusually strong, active, and knowing whale; when owing to these
Title:  qualities in him, as well as to the thousand concurring accidents of
Title:  such an audacious enterprise, eight or ten loose second irons may be
Title:  simultaneously dangling about him.  For, of course, each boat is
Title:  supplied with several harpoons to bend on to the line should the
Title:  first one be ineffectually darted without recovery.  All these
Title:  particulars are faithfully narrated here, as they will not fail to
Title:  elucidate several most important, however intricate passages, in
Title:  scenes hereafter to be painted.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 64
Title:  
Title:  Stubb's Supper.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Stubb's whale had been killed some distance from the ship.  It was a
Title:  calm; so, forming a tandem of three boats, we commenced the slow
Title:  business of towing the trophy to the Pequod.  And now, as we eighteen
Title:  men with our thirty-six arms, and one hundred and eighty thumbs and
Title:  fingers, slowly toiled hour after hour upon that inert, sluggish
Title:  corpse in the sea; and it seemed hardly to budge at all, except at
Title:  long intervals; good evidence was hereby furnished of the
Title:  enormousness of the mass we moved.  For, upon the great canal of
Title:  Hang-Ho, or whatever they call it, in China, four or five laborers on
Title:  the foot-path will draw a bulky freighted junk at the rate of a mile
Title:  an hour; but this grand argosy we towed heavily forged along, as if
Title:  laden with pig-lead in bulk.
Title:  
Title:  Darkness came on; but three lights up and down in the Pequod's
Title:  main-rigging dimly guided our way; till drawing nearer we saw Ahab
Title:  dropping one of several more lanterns over the bulwarks.  Vacantly
Title:  eyeing the heaving whale for a moment, he issued the usual orders for
Title:  securing it for the night, and then handing his lantern to a seaman,
Title:  went his way into the cabin, and did not come forward again until
Title:  morning.
Title:  
Title:  Though, in overseeing the pursuit of this whale, Captain Ahab had
Title:  evinced his customary activity, to call it so; yet now that the
Title:  creature was dead, some vague dissatisfaction, or impatience, or
Title:  despair, seemed working in him; as if the sight of that dead body
Title:  reminded him that Moby Dick was yet to be slain; and though a
Title:  thousand other whales were brought to his ship, all that would not
Title:  one jot advance his grand, monomaniac object.  Very soon you would
Title:  have thought from the sound on the Pequod's decks, that all hands
Title:  were preparing to cast anchor in the deep; for heavy chains are being
Title:  dragged along the deck, and thrust rattling out of the port-holes.
Title:  But by those clanking links, the vast corpse itself, not the ship, is
Title:  to be moored.  Tied by the head to the stern, and by the tail to the
Title:  bows, the whale now lies with its black hull close to the vessel's
Title:  and seen through the darkness of the night, which obscured the spars
Title:  and rigging aloft, the two--ship and whale, seemed yoked together
Title:  like colossal bullocks, whereof one reclines while the other remains
Title:  standing.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *A little item may as well be related here.  The strongest and most
Title:  reliable hold which the ship has upon the whale when moored
Title:  alongside, is by the flukes or tail; and as from its greater density
Title:  that part is relatively heavier than any other (excepting the
Title:  side-fins), its flexibility even in death, causes it to sink low
Title:  beneath the surface; so that with the hand you cannot get at it from
Title:  the boat, in order to put the chain round it.  But this difficulty is
Title:  ingeniously overcome: a small, strong line is prepared with a wooden
Title:  float at its outer end, and a weight in its middle, while the other
Title:  end is secured to the ship.  By adroit management the wooden float is
Title:  made to rise on the other side of the mass, so that now having
Title:  girdled the whale, the chain is readily made to follow suit; and
Title:  being slipped along the body, is at last locked fast round the
Title:  smallest part of the tail, at the point of junction with its broad
Title:  flukes or lobes.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  If moody Ahab was now all quiescence, at least so far as could be
Title:  known on deck, Stubb, his second mate, flushed with conquest,
Title:  betrayed an unusual but still good-natured excitement.  Such an
Title:  unwonted bustle was he in that the staid Starbuck, his official
Title:  superior, quietly resigned to him for the time the sole management of
Title:  affairs.  One small, helping cause of all this liveliness in Stubb,
Title:  was soon made strangely manifest.  Stubb was a high liver; he was
Title:  somewhat intemperately fond of the whale as a flavorish thing to his
Title:  palate.
Title:  
Title:  "A steak, a steak, ere I sleep!  You, Daggoo! overboard you go, and
Title:  cut me one from his small!"
Title:  
Title:  Here be it known, that though these wild fishermen do not, as a
Title:  general thing, and according to the great military maxim, make the
Title:  enemy defray the current expenses of the war (at least before
Title:  realizing the proceeds of the voyage), yet now and then you find some
Title:  of these Nantucketers who have a genuine relish for that particular
Title:  part of the Sperm Whale designated by Stubb; comprising the tapering
Title:  extremity of the body.
Title:  
Title:  About midnight that steak was cut and cooked; and lighted by two
Title:  lanterns of sperm oil, Stubb stoutly stood up to his spermaceti
Title:  supper at the capstan-head, as if that capstan were a sideboard.  Nor
Title:  was Stubb the only banqueter on whale's flesh that night.  Mingling
Title:  their mumblings with his own mastications, thousands on thousands of
Title:  sharks, swarming round the dead leviathan, smackingly feasted on its
Title:  fatness.  The few sleepers below in their bunks were often startled
Title:  by the sharp slapping of their tails against the hull, within a few
Title:  inches of the sleepers' hearts.  Peering over the side you could just
Title:  see them (as before you heard them) wallowing in the sullen, black
Title:  waters, and turning over on their backs as they scooped out huge
Title:  globular pieces of the whale of the bigness of a human head.  This
Title:  particular feat of the shark seems all but miraculous.  How at such
Title:  an apparently unassailable surface, they contrive to gouge out such
Title:  symmetrical mouthfuls, remains a part of the universal problem of all
Title:  things.  The mark they thus leave on the whale, may best be likened
Title:  to the hollow made by a carpenter in countersinking for a screw.
Title:  
Title:  Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight,
Title:  sharks will be seen longingly gazing up to the ship's decks, like
Title:  hungry dogs round a table where red meat is being carved, ready to
Title:  bolt down every killed man that is tossed to them; and though, while
Title:  the valiant butchers over the deck-table are thus cannibally carving
Title:  each other's live meat with carving-knives all gilded and tasselled,
Title:  the sharks, also, with their jewel-hilted mouths, are quarrelsomely
Title:  carving away under the table at the dead meat; and though, were you
Title:  to turn the whole affair upside down, it would still be pretty much
Title:  the same thing, that is to say, a shocking sharkish business enough
Title:  for all parties; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders
Title:  of all slave ships crossing the Atlantic, systematically trotting
Title:  alongside, to be handy in case a parcel is to be carried anywhere, or
Title:  a dead slave to be decently buried; and though one or two other like
Title:  instances might be set down, touching the set terms, places, and
Title:  occasions, when sharks do most socially congregate, and most
Title:  hilariously feast; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when
Title:  you will find them in such countless numbers, and in gayer or more
Title:  jovial spirits, than around a dead sperm whale, moored by night to a
Title:  whaleship at sea.  If you have never seen that sight, then suspend
Title:  your decision about the propriety of devil-worship, and the
Title:  expediency of conciliating the devil.
Title:  
Title:  But, as yet, Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was
Title:  going on so nigh him, no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of
Title:  his own epicurean lips.
Title:  
Title:  "Cook, cook!--where's that old Fleece?" he cried at length, widening
Title:  his legs still further, as if to form a more secure base for his
Title:  supper; and, at the same time darting his fork into the dish, as if
Title:  stabbing with his lance; "cook, you cook!--sail this way, cook!"
Title:  
Title:  The old black, not in any very high glee at having been previously
Title:  roused from his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour, came
Title:  shambling along from his galley, for, like many old blacks, there was
Title:  something the matter with his knee-pans, which he did not keep well
Title:  scoured like his other pans; this old Fleece, as they called him,
Title:  came shuffling and limping along, assisting his step with his tongs,
Title:  which, after a clumsy fashion, were made of straightened iron hoops;
Title:  this old Ebony floundered along, and in obedience to the word of
Title:  command, came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb's
Title:  sideboard; when, with both hands folded before him, and resting on
Title:  his two-legged cane, he bowed his arched back still further over, at
Title:  the same time sideways inclining his head, so as to bring his best
Title:  ear into play.
Title:  
Title:  "Cook," said Stubb, rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his
Title:  mouth, "don't you think this steak is rather overdone?  You've been
Title:  beating this steak too much, cook; it's too tender.  Don't I always
Title:  say that to be good, a whale-steak must be tough?  There are those
Title:  sharks now over the side, don't you see they prefer it tough and
Title:  rare?  What a shindy they are kicking up!  Cook, go and talk to 'em;
Title:  tell 'em they are welcome to help themselves civilly, and in
Title:  moderation, but they must keep quiet.  Blast me, if I can hear my own
Title:  voice.  Away, cook, and deliver my message.  Here, take this
Title:  lantern," snatching one from his sideboard; "now then, go and preach
Title:  to 'em!"
Title:  
Title:  Sullenly taking the offered lantern, old Fleece limped across the
Title:  deck to the bulwarks; and then, with one hand dropping his light low
Title:  over the sea, so as to get a good view of his congregation, with the
Title:  other hand he solemnly flourished his tongs, and leaning far over the
Title:  side in a mumbling voice began addressing the sharks, while Stubb,
Title:  softly crawling behind, overheard all that was said.
Title:  
Title:  "Fellow-critters: I'se ordered here to say dat you must stop dat dam
Title:  noise dare.  You hear?  Stop dat dam smackin' ob de lips!  Massa
Title:  Stubb say dat you can fill your dam bellies up to de hatchings, but
Title:  by Gor! you must stop dat dam racket!"
Title:  
Title:  "Cook," here interposed Stubb, accompanying the word with a sudden
Title:  slap on the shoulder,--"Cook! why, damn your eyes, you mustn't swear
Title:  that way when you're preaching.  That's no way to convert sinners,
Title:  cook!"
Title:  
Title:  "Who dat?  Den preach to him yourself," sullenly turning to go.
Title:  
Title:  "No, cook; go on, go on."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, den, Belubed fellow-critters:"-
Title:  
Title:  "Right!" exclaimed Stubb, approvingly, "coax 'em to it; try that,"
Title:  and Fleece continued.
Title:  
Title:  "Do you is all sharks, and by natur wery woracious, yet I zay to you,
Title:  fellow-critters, dat dat woraciousness--'top dat dam slappin' ob de
Title:  tail!  How you tink to hear, spose you keep up such a dam slappin'
Title:  and bitin' dare?"
Title:  
Title:  "Cook," cried Stubb, collaring him, "I won't have that swearing.
Title:  Talk to 'em gentlemanly."
Title:  
Title:  Once more the sermon proceeded.
Title:  
Title:  "Your woraciousness, fellow-critters, I don't blame ye so much for;
Title:  dat is natur, and can't be helped; but to gobern dat wicked natur,
Title:  dat is de pint.  You is sharks, sartin; but if you gobern de shark in
Title:  you, why den you be angel; for all angel is not'ing more dan de shark
Title:  well goberned.  Now, look here, bred'ren, just try wonst to be cibil,
Title:  a helping yourselbs from dat whale.  Don't be tearin' de blubber out
Title:  your neighbour's mout, I say.  Is not one shark dood right as toder
Title:  to dat whale?  And, by Gor, none on you has de right to dat whale;
Title:  dat whale belong to some one else.  I know some o' you has berry brig
Title:  mout, brigger dan oders; but den de brig mouts sometimes has de
Title:  small bellies; so dat de brigness of de mout is not to swaller wid,
Title:  but to bit off de blubber for de small fry ob sharks, dat can't get
Title:  into de scrouge to help demselves."
Title:  
Title:  "Well done, old Fleece!" cried Stubb, "that's Christianity; go on."
Title:  
Title:  "No use goin' on; de dam willains will keep a scougin' and slappin'
Title:  each oder, Massa Stubb; dey don't hear one word; no use a-preaching
Title:  to such dam g'uttons as you call 'em, till dare bellies is full, and
Title:  dare bellies is bottomless; and when dey do get 'em full, dey wont
Title:  hear you den; for den dey sink in the sea, go fast to sleep on de
Title:  coral, and can't hear noting at all, no more, for eber and eber."
Title:  
Title:  "Upon my soul, I am about of the same opinion; so give the
Title:  benediction, Fleece, and I'll away to my supper."
Title:  
Title:  Upon this, Fleece, holding both hands over the fishy mob, raised his
Title:  shrill voice, and cried--
Title:  
Title:  "Cussed fellow-critters!  Kick up de damndest row as ever you can;
Title:  fill your dam bellies 'till dey bust--and den die."
Title:  
Title:  "Now, cook," said Stubb, resuming his supper at the capstan; "stand
Title:  just where you stood before, there, over against me, and pay
Title:  particular attention."
Title:  
Title:  "All 'dention," said Fleece, again stooping over upon his tongs in
Title:  the desired position.
Title:  
Title:  "Well," said Stubb, helping himself freely meanwhile; "I shall now go
Title:  back to the subject of this steak.  In the first place, how old are
Title:  you, cook?"
Title:  
Title:  "What dat do wid de 'teak," said the old black, testily.
Title:  
Title:  "Silence!  How old are you, cook?"
Title:  
Title:  "'Bout ninety, dey say," he gloomily muttered.
Title:  
Title:  "And you have lived in this world hard upon one hundred years, cook,
Title:  and don't know yet how to cook a whale-steak?" rapidly bolting
Title:  another mouthful at the last word, so that morsel seemed a
Title:  continuation of the question.  "Where were you born, cook?"
Title:  
Title:  "'Hind de hatchway, in ferry-boat, goin' ober de Roanoke."
Title:  
Title:  "Born in a ferry-boat!  That's queer, too.  But I want to know what
Title:  country you were born in, cook!"
Title:  
Title:  "Didn't I say de Roanoke country?" he cried sharply.
Title:  
Title:  "No, you didn't, cook; but I'll tell you what I'm coming to, cook.
Title:  You must go home and be born over again; you don't know how to cook a
Title:  whale-steak yet."
Title:  
Title:  "Bress my soul, if I cook noder one," he growled, angrily, turning
Title:  round to depart.
Title:  
Title:  "Come back here, cook;--here, hand me those tongs;--now take that bit
Title:  of steak there, and tell me if you think that steak cooked as it
Title:  should be?  Take it, I say"--holding the tongs towards him--"take it,
Title:  and taste it."
Title:  
Title:  Faintly smacking his withered lips over it for a moment, the old
Title:  negro muttered, "Best cooked 'teak I eber taste; joosy, berry joosy."
Title:  
Title:  "Cook," said Stubb, squaring himself once more; "do you belong to the
Title:  church?"
Title:  
Title:  "Passed one once in Cape-Down," said the old man sullenly.
Title:  
Title:  "And you have once in your life passed a holy church in Cape-Town,
Title:  where you doubtless overheard a holy parson addressing his hearers as
Title:  his beloved fellow-creatures, have you, cook!  And yet you come here,
Title:  and tell me such a dreadful lie as you did just now, eh?" said Stubb.
Title:  "Where do you expect to go to, cook?"
Title:  
Title:  "Go to bed berry soon," he mumbled, half-turning as he spoke.
Title:  
Title:  "Avast! heave to!  I mean when you die, cook.  It's an awful
Title:  question.  Now what's your answer?"
Title:  
Title:  "When dis old brack man dies," said the negro slowly, changing his
Title:  whole air and demeanor, "he hisself won't go nowhere; but some
Title:  bressed angel will come and fetch him."
Title:  
Title:  "Fetch him?  How?  In a coach and four, as they fetched Elijah?  And
Title:  fetch him where?"
Title:  
Title:  "Up dere," said Fleece, holding his tongs straight over his head, and
Title:  keeping it there very solemnly.
Title:  
Title:  "So, then, you expect to go up into our main-top, do you, cook, when
Title:  you are dead?  But don't you know the higher you climb, the colder it
Title:  gets?  Main-top, eh?"
Title:  
Title:  "Didn't say dat t'all," said Fleece, again in the sulks.
Title:  
Title:  "You said up there, didn't you? and now look yourself, and see where
Title:  your tongs are pointing.  But, perhaps you expect to get into heaven
Title:  by crawling through the lubber's hole, cook; but, no, no, cook, you
Title:  don't get there, except you go the regular way, round by the rigging.
Title:  It's a ticklish business, but must be done, or else it's no go.  But
Title:  none of us are in heaven yet.  Drop your tongs, cook, and hear my
Title:  orders.  Do ye hear?  Hold your hat in one hand, and clap t'other
Title:  a'top of your heart, when I'm giving my orders, cook.  What! that
Title:  your heart, there?--that's your gizzard!  Aloft! aloft!--that's
Title:  it--now you have it.  Hold it there now, and pay attention."
Title:  
Title:  "All 'dention," said the old black, with both hands placed as
Title:  desired, vainly wriggling his grizzled head, as if to get both ears
Title:  in front at one and the same time.
Title:  
Title:  "Well then, cook, you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad,
Title:  that I have put it out of sight as soon as possible; you see that,
Title:  don't you?  Well, for the future, when you cook another whale-steak
Title:  for my private table here, the capstan, I'll tell you what to do so
Title:  as not to spoil it by overdoing.  Hold the steak in one hand, and
Title:  show a live coal to it with the other; that done, dish it; d'ye hear?
Title:  And now to-morrow, cook, when we are cutting in the fish, be sure
Title:  you stand by to get the tips of his fins; have them put in pickle.
Title:  As for the ends of the flukes, have them soused, cook.  There, now ye
Title:  may go."
Title:  
Title:  But Fleece had hardly got three paces off, when he was recalled.
Title:  
Title:  "Cook, give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch.
Title:  D'ye hear? away you sail, then.--Halloa! stop! make a bow before you
Title:  go.--Avast heaving again!  Whale-balls for breakfast--don't forget."
Title:  
Title:  "Wish, by gor! whale eat him, 'stead of him eat whale.  I'm bressed
Title:  if he ain't more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself," muttered the old
Title:  man, limping away; with which sage ejaculation he went to his
Title:  hammock.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 65
Title:  
Title:  The Whale as a Dish.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp,
Title:  and, like Stubb, eat him by his own light, as you may say; this seems
Title:  so outlandish a thing that one must needs go a little into the
Title:  history and philosophy of it.
Title:  
Title:  It is upon record, that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right
Title:  Whale was esteemed a great delicacy in France, and commanded large
Title:  prices there.  Also, that in Henry VIIIth's time, a certain cook of
Title:  the court obtained a handsome reward for inventing an admirable sauce
Title:  to be eaten with barbacued porpoises, which, you remember, are a
Title:  species of whale.  Porpoises, indeed, are to this day considered fine
Title:  eating.  The meat is made into balls about the size of billiard
Title:  balls, and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for
Title:  turtle-balls or veal balls.  The old monks of Dunfermline were very
Title:  fond of them.  They had a great porpoise grant from the crown.
Title:  
Title:  The fact is, that among his hunters at least, the whale would by all
Title:  hands be considered a noble dish, were there not so much of him; but
Title:  when you come to sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet
Title:  long, it takes away your appetite.  Only the most unprejudiced of men
Title:  like Stubb, nowadays partake of cooked whales; but the Esquimaux are
Title:  not so fastidious.  We all know how they live upon whales, and have
Title:  rare old vintages of prime old train oil.  Zogranda, one of their
Title:  most famous doctors, recommends strips of blubber for infants, as
Title:  being exceedingly juicy and nourishing.  And this reminds me that
Title:  certain Englishmen, who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland
Title:  by a whaling vessel--that these men actually lived for several months
Title:  on the mouldy scraps of whales which had been left ashore after
Title:  trying out the blubber.  Among the Dutch whalemen these scraps are
Title:  called "fritters"; which, indeed, they greatly resemble, being brown
Title:  and crisp, and smelling something like old Amsterdam housewives'
Title:  dough-nuts or oly-cooks, when fresh.  They have such an eatable look
Title:  that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off.
Title:  
Title:  But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish, is his
Title:  exceeding richness.  He is the great prize ox of the sea, too fat to
Title:  be delicately good.  Look at his hump, which would be as fine eating
Title:  as the buffalo's (which is esteemed a rare dish), were it not such a
Title:  solid pyramid of fat.  But the spermaceti itself, how bland and
Title:  creamy that is; like the transparent, half-jellied, white meat of a
Title:  cocoanut in the third month of its growth, yet far too rich to supply
Title:  a substitute for butter.  Nevertheless, many whalemen have a method
Title:  of absorbing it into some other substance, and then partaking of it.
Title:  In the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the
Title:  seamen to dip their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them
Title:  fry there awhile.  Many a good supper have I thus made.
Title:  
Title:  In the case of a small Sperm Whale the brains are accounted a fine
Title:  dish.  The casket of the skull is broken into with an axe, and the
Title:  two plump, whitish lobes being withdrawn (precisely resembling two
Title:  large puddings), they are then mixed with flour, and cooked into a
Title:  most delectable mess, in flavor somewhat resembling calves' head,
Title:  which is quite a dish among some epicures; and every one knows that
Title:  some young bucks among the epicures, by continually dining upon
Title:  calves' brains, by and by get to have a little brains of their own,
Title:  so as to be able to tell a calf's head from their own heads; which,
Title:  indeed, requires uncommon discrimination.  And that is the reason why
Title:  a young buck with an intelligent looking calf's head before him, is
Title:  somehow one of the saddest sights you can see.  The head looks a sort
Title:  of reproachfully at him, with an "Et tu Brute!" expression.
Title:  
Title:  It is not, perhaps, entirely because the whale is so excessively
Title:  unctuous that landsmen seem to regard the eating of him with
Title:  abhorrence; that appears to result, in some way, from the
Title:  consideration before mentioned: i.e. that a man should eat a newly
Title:  murdered thing of the sea, and eat it too by its own light.  But no
Title:  doubt the first man that ever murdered an ox was regarded as a
Title:  murderer; perhaps he was hung; and if he had been put on his trial by
Title:  oxen, he certainly would have been; and he certainly deserved it if
Title:  any murderer does.  Go to the meat-market of a Saturday night and see
Title:  the crowds of live bipeds staring up at the long rows of dead
Title:  quadrupeds.  Does not that sight take a tooth out of the cannibal's
Title:  jaw?  Cannibals? who is not a cannibal?  I tell you it will be more
Title:  tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in his
Title:  cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that
Title:  provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgment, than for thee,
Title:  civilized and enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground
Title:  and feastest on their bloated livers in thy pate-de-foie-gras.
Title:  
Title:  But Stubb, he eats the whale by its own light, does he? and that is
Title:  adding insult to injury, is it?  Look at your knife-handle, there, my
Title:  civilized and enlightened gourmand dining off that roast beef, what
Title:  is that handle made of?--what but the bones of the brother of the
Title:  very ox you are eating?  And what do you pick your teeth with, after
Title:  devouring that fat goose?  With a feather of the same fowl.  And with
Title:  what quill did the Secretary of the Society for the Suppression of
Title:  Cruelty to Ganders formally indite his circulars?  It is only within
Title:  the last month or two that that society passed a resolution to
Title:  patronise nothing but steel pens.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 66
Title:  
Title:  The Shark Massacre.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  When in the Southern Fishery, a captured Sperm Whale, after long and
Title:  weary toil, is brought alongside late at night, it is not, as a
Title:  general thing at least, customary to proceed at once to the business
Title:  of cutting him in.  For that business is an exceedingly laborious
Title:  one; is not very soon completed; and requires all hands to set about
Title:  it.  Therefore, the common usage is to take in all sail; lash the
Title:  helm a'lee; and then send every one below to his hammock till
Title:  daylight, with the reservation that, until that time, anchor-watches
Title:  shall be kept; that is, two and two for an hour, each couple, the
Title:  crew in rotation shall mount the deck to see that all goes well.
Title:  
Title:  But sometimes, especially upon the Line in the Pacific, this plan
Title:  will not answer at all; because such incalculable hosts of sharks
Title:  gather round the moored carcase, that were he left so for six hours,
Title:  say, on a stretch, little more than the skeleton would be visible by
Title:  morning.  In most other parts of the ocean, however, where these fish
Title:  do not so largely abound, their wondrous voracity can be at times
Title:  considerably diminished, by vigorously stirring them up with sharp
Title:  whaling-spades, a procedure notwithstanding, which, in some
Title:  instances, only seems to tickle them into still greater activity.
Title:  But it was not thus in the present case with the Pequod's sharks;
Title:  though, to be sure, any man unaccustomed to such sights, to have
Title:  looked over her side that night, would have almost thought the whole
Title:  round sea was one huge cheese, and those sharks the maggots in it.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, upon Stubb setting the anchor-watch after his supper
Title:  was concluded; and when, accordingly, Queequeg and a forecastle
Title:  seaman came on deck, no small excitement was created among the
Title:  sharks; for immediately suspending the cutting stages over the side,
Title:  and lowering three lanterns, so that they cast long gleams of light
Title:  over the turbid sea, these two mariners, darting their long
Title:  whaling-spades, kept up an incessant murdering of the sharks,* by
Title:  striking the keen steel deep into their skulls, seemingly their only
Title:  vital part.  But in the foamy confusion of their mixed and struggling
Title:  hosts, the marksmen could not always hit their mark; and this brought
Title:  about new revelations of the incredible ferocity of the foe.  They
Title:  viciously snapped, not only at each other's disembowelments, but like
Title:  flexible bows, bent round, and bit their own; till those entrails
Title:  seemed swallowed over and over again by the same mouth, to be
Title:  oppositely voided by the gaping wound.  Nor was this all.  It was
Title:  unsafe to meddle with the corpses and ghosts of these creatures.  A
Title:  sort of generic or Pantheistic vitality seemed to lurk in their very
Title:  joints and bones, after what might be called the individual life had
Title:  departed.  Killed and hoisted on deck for the sake of his skin, one
Title:  of these sharks almost took poor Queequeg's hand off, when he tried
Title:  to shut down the dead lid of his murderous jaw.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *The whaling-spade used for cutting-in is made of the very best
Title:  steel; is about the bigness of a man's spread hand; and in general
Title:  shape, corresponds to the garden implement after which it is named;
Title:  only its sides are perfectly flat, and its upper end considerably
Title:  narrower than the lower.  This weapon is always kept as sharp as
Title:  possible; and when being used is occasionally honed, just like a
Title:  razor.  In its socket, a stiff pole, from twenty to thirty feet long,
Title:  is inserted for a handle.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Queequeg no care what god made him shark," said the savage,
Title:  agonizingly lifting his hand up and down; "wedder Fejee god or
Title:  Nantucket god; but de god wat made shark must be one dam Ingin."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 67
Title:  
Title:  Cutting In.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was a Saturday night, and such a Sabbath as followed!  Ex officio
Title:  professors of Sabbath breaking are all whalemen.  The ivory Pequod
Title:  was turned into what seemed a shamble; every sailor a butcher.  You
Title:  would have thought we were offering up ten thousand red oxen to the
Title:  sea gods.
Title:  
Title:  In the first place, the enormous cutting tackles, among other
Title:  ponderous things comprising a cluster of blocks generally painted
Title:  green, and which no single man can possibly lift--this vast bunch of
Title:  grapes was swayed up to the main-top and firmly lashed to the lower
Title:  mast-head, the strongest point anywhere above a ship's deck.  The end
Title:  of the hawser-like rope winding through these intricacies, was then
Title:  conducted to the windlass, and the huge lower block of the tackles
Title:  was swung over the whale; to this block the great blubber hook,
Title:  weighing some one hundred pounds, was attached.  And now suspended in
Title:  stages over the side, Starbuck and Stubb, the mates, armed with their
Title:  long spades, began cutting a hole in the body for the insertion of
Title:  the hook just above the nearest of the two side-fins.  This done, a
Title:  broad, semicircular line is cut round the hole, the hook is inserted,
Title:  and the main body of the crew striking up a wild chorus, now commence
Title:  heaving in one dense crowd at the windlass.  When instantly, the
Title:  entire ship careens over on her side; every bolt in her starts like
Title:  the nail-heads of an old house in frosty weather; she trembles,
Title:  quivers, and nods her frighted mast-heads to the sky.  More and more
Title:  she leans over to the whale, while every gasping heave of the
Title:  windlass is answered by a helping heave from the billows; till at
Title:  last, a swift, startling snap is heard; with a great swash the ship
Title:  rolls upwards and backwards from the whale, and the triumphant tackle
Title:  rises into sight dragging after it the disengaged semicircular end of
Title:  the first strip of blubber.  Now as the blubber envelopes the whale
Title:  precisely as the rind does an orange, so is it stripped off from the
Title:  body precisely as an orange is sometimes stripped by spiralizing it.
Title:  For the strain constantly kept up by the windlass continually keeps
Title:  the whale rolling over and over in the water, and as the blubber in
Title:  one strip uniformly peels off along the line called the "scarf,"
Title:  simultaneously cut by the spades of Starbuck and Stubb, the mates;
Title:  and just as fast as it is thus peeled off, and indeed by that very
Title:  act itself, it is all the time being hoisted higher and higher aloft
Title:  till its upper end grazes the main-top; the men at the windlass then
Title:  cease heaving, and for a moment or two the prodigious blood-dripping
Title:  mass sways to and fro as if let down from the sky, and every one
Title:  present must take good heed to dodge it when it swings, else it may
Title:  box his ears and pitch him headlong overboard.
Title:  
Title:  One of the attending harpooneers now advances with a long, keen
Title:  weapon called a boarding-sword, and watching his chance he
Title:  dexterously slices out a considerable hole in the lower part of the
Title:  swaying mass.  Into this hole, the end of the second alternating
Title:  great tackle is then hooked so as to retain a hold upon the blubber,
Title:  in order to prepare for what follows.  Whereupon, this accomplished
Title:  swordsman, warning all hands to stand off, once more makes a
Title:  scientific dash at the mass, and with a few sidelong, desperate,
Title:  lunging slicings, severs it completely in twain; so that while the
Title:  short lower part is still fast, the long upper strip, called a
Title:  blanket-piece, swings clear, and is all ready for lowering.  The
Title:  heavers forward now resume their song, and while the one tackle is
Title:  peeling and hoisting a second strip from the whale, the other is
Title:  slowly slackened away, and down goes the first strip through the main
Title:  hatchway right beneath, into an unfurnished parlor called the
Title:  blubber-room.  Into this twilight apartment sundry nimble hands keep
Title:  coiling away the long blanket-piece as if it were a great live mass
Title:  of plaited serpents.  And thus the work proceeds; the two tackles
Title:  hoisting and lowering simultaneously; both whale and windlass
Title:  heaving, the heavers singing, the blubber-room gentlemen coiling, the
Title:  mates scarfing, the ship straining, and all hands swearing
Title:  occasionally, by way of assuaging the general friction.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 68
Title:  
Title:  The Blanket.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I have given no small attention to that not unvexed subject, the skin
Title:  of the whale.  I have had controversies about it with experienced
Title:  whalemen afloat, and learned naturalists ashore.  My original opinion
Title:  remains unchanged; but it is only an opinion.
Title:  
Title:  The question is, what and where is the skin of the whale?  Already
Title:  you know what his blubber is.  That blubber is something of the
Title:  consistence of firm, close-grained beef, but tougher, more elastic
Title:  and compact, and ranges from eight or ten to twelve and fifteen
Title:  inches in thickness.
Title:  
Title:  Now, however preposterous it may at first seem to talk of any
Title:  creature's skin as being of that sort of consistence and thickness,
Title:  yet in point of fact these are no arguments against such a
Title:  presumption; because you cannot raise any other dense enveloping
Title:  layer from the whale's body but that same blubber; and the outermost
Title:  enveloping layer of any animal, if reasonably dense, what can that be
Title:  but the skin?  True, from the unmarred dead body of the whale, you
Title:  may scrape off with your hand an infinitely thin, transparent
Title:  substance, somewhat resembling the thinnest shreds of isinglass, only
Title:  it is almost as flexible and soft as satin; that is, previous to
Title:  being dried, when it not only contracts and thickens, but becomes
Title:  rather hard and brittle.  I have several such dried bits, which I use
Title:  for marks in my whale-books.  It is transparent, as I said before;
Title:  and being laid upon the printed page, I have sometimes pleased myself
Title:  with fancying it exerted a magnifying influence.  At any rate, it is
Title:  pleasant to read about whales through their own spectacles, as you
Title:  may say.  But what I am driving at here is this.  That same
Title:  infinitely thin, isinglass substance, which, I admit, invests the
Title:  entire body of the whale, is not so much to be regarded as the skin
Title:  of the creature, as the skin of the skin, so to speak; for it were
Title:  simply ridiculous to say, that the proper skin of the tremendous
Title:  whale is thinner and more tender than the skin of a new-born child.
Title:  But no more of this.
Title:  
Title:  Assuming the blubber to be the skin of the whale; then, when this
Title:  skin, as in the case of a very large Sperm Whale, will yield the bulk
Title:  of one hundred barrels of oil; and, when it is considered that, in
Title:  quantity, or rather weight, that oil, in its expressed state, is only
Title:  three fourths, and not the entire substance of the coat; some idea
Title:  may hence be had of the enormousness of that animated mass, a mere
Title:  part of whose mere integument yields such a lake of liquid as that.
Title:  Reckoning ten barrels to the ton, you have ten tons for the net
Title:  weight of only three quarters of the stuff of the whale's skin.
Title:  
Title:  In life, the visible surface of the Sperm Whale is not the least
Title:  among the many marvels he presents.  Almost invariably it is all over
Title:  obliquely crossed and re-crossed with numberless straight marks in
Title:  thick array, something like those in the finest Italian line
Title:  engravings.  But these marks do not seem to be impressed upon the
Title:  isinglass substance above mentioned, but seem to be seen through it,
Title:  as if they were engraved upon the body itself.  Nor is this all.  In
Title:  some instances, to the quick, observant eye, those linear marks, as
Title:  in a veritable engraving, but afford the ground for far other
Title:  delineations.  These are hieroglyphical; that is, if you call those
Title:  mysterious cyphers on the walls of pyramids hieroglyphics, then that
Title:  is the proper word to use in the present connexion.  By my retentive
Title:  memory of the hieroglyphics upon one Sperm Whale in particular, I was
Title:  much struck with a plate representing the old Indian characters
Title:  chiselled on the famous hieroglyphic palisades on the banks of the
Title:  Upper Mississippi.  Like those mystic rocks, too, the mystic-marked
Title:  whale remains undecipherable.  This allusion to the Indian rocks
Title:  reminds me of another thing.  Besides all the other phenomena which
Title:  the exterior of the Sperm Whale presents, he not seldom displays the
Title:  back, and more especially his flanks, effaced in great part of the
Title:  regular linear appearance, by reason of numerous rude scratches,
Title:  altogether of an irregular, random aspect.  I should say that those
Title:  New England rocks on the sea-coast, which Agassiz imagines to bear
Title:  the marks of violent scraping contact with vast floating icebergs--I
Title:  should say, that those rocks must not a little resemble the Sperm
Title:  Whale in this particular.  It also seems to me that such scratches in
Title:  the whale are probably made by hostile contact with other whales; for
Title:  I have most remarked them in the large, full-grown bulls of the
Title:  species.
Title:  
Title:  A word or two more concerning this matter of the skin or blubber of
Title:  the whale.  It has already been said, that it is stript from him in
Title:  long pieces, called blanket-pieces.  Like most sea-terms, this one is
Title:  very happy and significant.  For the whale is indeed wrapt up in his
Title:  blubber as in a real blanket or counterpane; or, still better, an
Title:  Indian poncho slipt over his head, and skirting his extremity.  It is
Title:  by reason of this cosy blanketing of his body, that the whale is
Title:  enabled to keep himself comfortable in all weathers, in all seas,
Title:  times, and tides.  What would become of a Greenland whale, say, in
Title:  those shuddering, icy seas of the North, if unsupplied with his cosy
Title:  surtout?  True, other fish are found exceedingly brisk in those
Title:  Hyperborean waters; but these, be it observed, are your cold-blooded,
Title:  lungless fish, whose very bellies are refrigerators; creatures, that
Title:  warm themselves under the lee of an iceberg, as a traveller in winter
Title:  would bask before an inn fire; whereas, like man, the whale has lungs
Title:  and warm blood.  Freeze his blood, and he dies.  How wonderful is it
Title:  then--except after explanation--that this great monster, to whom
Title:  corporeal warmth is as indispensable as it is to man; how wonderful
Title:  that he should be found at home, immersed to his lips for life in
Title:  those Arctic waters! where, when seamen fall overboard, they are
Title:  sometimes found, months afterwards, perpendicularly frozen into the
Title:  hearts of fields of ice, as a fly is found glued in amber.  But more
Title:  surprising is it to know, as has been proved by experiment, that the
Title:  blood of a Polar whale is warmer than that of a Borneo negro in
Title:  summer.
Title:  
Title:  It does seem to me, that herein we see the rare virtue of a strong
Title:  individual vitality, and the rare virtue of thick walls, and the rare
Title:  virtue of interior spaciousness.  Oh, man! admire and model thyself
Title:  after the whale!  Do thou, too, remain warm among ice.  Do thou, too,
Title:  live in this world without being of it.  Be cool at the equator; keep
Title:  thy blood fluid at the Pole.  Like the great dome of St. Peter's, and
Title:  like the great whale, retain, O man! in all seasons a temperature of
Title:  thine own.
Title:  
Title:  But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things!  Of
Title:  erections, how few are domed like St. Peter's! of creatures, how few
Title:  vast as the whale!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 69
Title:  
Title:  The Funeral.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Haul in the chains!  Let the carcase go astern!
Title:  
Title:  The vast tackles have now done their duty.  The peeled white body of
Title:  the beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre; though changed in
Title:  hue, it has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk.  It is still
Title:  colossal.  Slowly it floats more and more away, the water round it
Title:  torn and splashed by the insatiate sharks, and the air above vexed
Title:  with rapacious flights of screaming fowls, whose beaks are like so
Title:  many insulting poniards in the whale.  The vast white headless
Title:  phantom floats further and further from the ship, and every rod that
Title:  it so floats, what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of
Title:  fowls, augment the murderous din.  For hours and hours from the
Title:  almost stationary ship that hideous sight is seen.  Beneath the
Title:  unclouded and mild azure sky, upon the fair face of the pleasant sea,
Title:  wafted by the joyous breezes, that great mass of death floats on and
Title:  on, till lost in infinite perspectives.
Title:  
Title:  There's a most doleful and most mocking funeral!  The sea-vultures
Title:  all in pious mourning, the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or
Title:  speckled.  In life but few of them would have helped the whale, I
Title:  ween, if peradventure he had needed it; but upon the banquet of his
Title:  funeral they most piously do pounce.  Oh, horrible vultureism of
Title:  earth! from which not the mightiest whale is free.
Title:  
Title:  Nor is this the end.  Desecrated as the body is, a vengeful ghost
Title:  survives and hovers over it to scare.  Espied by some timid
Title:  man-of-war or blundering discovery-vessel from afar, when the
Title:  distance obscuring the swarming fowls, nevertheless still shows the
Title:  white mass floating in the sun, and the white spray heaving high
Title:  against it; straightway the whale's unharming corpse, with trembling
Title:  fingers is set down in the log--SHOALS, ROCKS, AND BREAKERS
Title:  HEREABOUTS: BEWARE!  And for years afterwards, perhaps, ships shun
Title:  the place; leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum, because
Title:  their leader originally leaped there when a stick was held.  There's
Title:  your law of precedents; there's your utility of traditions; there's
Title:  the story of your obstinate survival of old beliefs never bottomed on
Title:  the earth, and now not even hovering in the air!  There's orthodoxy!
Title:  
Title:  Thus, while in life the great whale's body may have been a real
Title:  terror to his foes, in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic
Title:  to a world.
Title:  
Title:  Are you a believer in ghosts, my friend?  There are other ghosts than
Title:  the Cock-Lane one, and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe
Title:  in them.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 70
Title:  
Title:  The Sphynx.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping
Title:  the body of the leviathan, he was beheaded.  Now, the beheading of
Title:  the Sperm Whale is a scientific anatomical feat, upon which
Title:  experienced whale surgeons very much pride themselves: and not
Title:  without reason.
Title:  
Title:  Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a
Title:  neck; on the contrary, where his head and body seem to join, there,
Title:  in that very place, is the thickest part of him.  Remember, also,
Title:  that the surgeon must operate from above, some eight or ten feet
Title:  intervening between him and his subject, and that subject almost
Title:  hidden in a discoloured, rolling, and oftentimes tumultuous and
Title:  bursting sea.  Bear in mind, too, that under these untoward
Title:  circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh; and in that
Title:  subterraneous manner, without so much as getting one single peep into
Title:  the ever-contracting gash thus made, he must skilfully steer clear
Title:  of all adjacent, interdicted parts, and exactly divide the spine at a
Title:  critical point hard by its insertion into the skull.  Do you not
Title:  marvel, then, at Stubb's boast, that he demanded but ten minutes to
Title:  behead a sperm whale?
Title:  
Title:  When first severed, the head is dropped astern and held there by a
Title:  cable till the body is stripped.  That done, if it belong to a small
Title:  whale it is hoisted on deck to be deliberately disposed of.  But,
Title:  with a full grown leviathan this is impossible; for the sperm whale's
Title:  head embraces nearly one third of his entire bulk, and completely to
Title:  suspend such a burden as that, even by the immense tackles of a
Title:  whaler, this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing a Dutch barn
Title:  in jewellers' scales.
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod's whale being decapitated and the body stripped, the head
Title:  was hoisted against the ship's side--about half way out of the sea,
Title:  so that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native
Title:  element.  And there with the strained craft steeply leaning over to it,
Title:  by reason of the enormous downward drag from the lower mast-head, and
Title:  every yard-arm on that side projecting like a crane over the waves;
Title:  there, that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod's waist like the
Title:  giant Holofernes's from the girdle of Judith.
Title:  
Title:  When this last task was accomplished it was noon, and the seamen went
Title:  below to their dinner.  Silence reigned over the before tumultuous
Title:  but now deserted deck.  An intense copper calm, like a universal
Title:  yellow lotus, was more and more unfolding its noiseless measureless
Title:  leaves upon the sea.
Title:  
Title:  A short space elapsed, and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone
Title:  from his cabin.  Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck, he paused to
Title:  gaze over the side, then slowly getting into the main-chains he took
Title:  Stubb's long spade--still remaining there after the whale's
Title:  Decapitation--and striking it into the lower part of the
Title:  half-suspended mass, placed its other end crutch-wise under one arm,
Title:  and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on this head.
Title:  
Title:  It was a black and hooded head; and hanging there in the midst of so
Title:  intense a calm, it seemed the Sphynx's in the desert.  "Speak, thou
Title:  vast and venerable head," muttered Ahab, "which, though ungarnished
Title:  with a beard, yet here and there lookest hoary with mosses; speak,
Title:  mighty head, and tell us the secret thing that is in thee.  Of all
Title:  divers, thou hast dived the deepest.  That head upon which the upper
Title:  sun now gleams, has moved amid this world's foundations.  Where
Title:  unrecorded names and navies rust, and untold hopes and anchors rot;
Title:  where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with
Title:  bones of millions of the drowned; there, in that awful water-land,
Title:  there was thy most familiar home.  Thou hast been where bell or diver
Title:  never went; hast slept by many a sailor's side, where sleepless
Title:  mothers would give their lives to lay them down.  Thou saw'st the
Title:  locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship; heart to heart
Title:  they sank beneath the exulting wave; true to each other, when heaven
Title:  seemed false to them.  Thou saw'st the murdered mate when tossed by
Title:  pirates from the midnight deck; for hours he fell into the deeper
Title:  midnight of the insatiate maw; and his murderers still sailed on
Title:  unharmed--while swift lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that
Title:  would have borne a righteous husband to outstretched, longing arms.
Title:  O head! thou hast seen enough to split the planets and make an
Title:  infidel of Abraham, and not one syllable is thine!"
Title:  
Title:  "Sail ho!" cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye?  Well, now, that's cheering," cried Ahab, suddenly erecting
Title:  himself, while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow.  "That
Title:  lively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert a better
Title:  man.--Where away?"
Title:  
Title:  "Three points on the starboard bow, sir, and bringing down her breeze
Title:  to us!
Title:  
Title:  "Better and better, man.  Would now St. Paul would come along that
Title:  way, and to my breezelessness bring his breeze!  O Nature, and O soul
Title:  of man! how far beyond all utterance are your linked analogies! not
Title:  the smallest atom stirs or lives on matter, but has its cunning
Title:  duplicate in mind."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 71
Title:  
Title:  The Jeroboam's Story.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Hand in hand, ship and breeze blew on; but the breeze came faster
Title:  than the ship, and soon the Pequod began to rock.
Title:  
Title:  By and by, through the glass the stranger's boats and manned
Title:  mast-heads proved her a whale-ship.  But as she was so far to
Title:  windward, and shooting by, apparently making a passage to some other
Title:  ground, the Pequod could not hope to reach her.  So the signal was
Title:  set to see what response would be made.
Title:  
Title:  Here be it said, that like the vessels of military marines, the ships
Title:  of the American Whale Fleet have each a private signal; all which
Title:  signals being collected in a book with the names of the respective
Title:  vessels attached, every captain is provided with it.  Thereby, the
Title:  whale commanders are enabled to recognise each other upon the ocean,
Title:  even at considerable distances and with no small facility.
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod's signal was at last responded to by the stranger's
Title:  setting her own; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of
Title:  Nantucket.  Squaring her yards, she bore down, ranged abeam under the
Title:  Pequod's lee, and lowered a boat; it soon drew nigh; but, as the
Title:  side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck's order to accommodate the
Title:  visiting captain, the stranger in question waved his hand from his
Title:  boat's stern in token of that proceeding being entirely unnecessary.
Title:  It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on board,
Title:  and that Mayhew, her captain, was fearful of infecting the Pequod's
Title:  company.  For, though himself and boat's crew remained untainted, and
Title:  though his ship was half a rifle-shot off, and an incorruptible sea
Title:  and air rolling and flowing between; yet conscientiously adhering to
Title:  the timid quarantine of the land, he peremptorily refused to come
Title:  into direct contact with the Pequod.
Title:  
Title:  But this did by no means prevent all communications.  Preserving an
Title:  interval of some few yards between itself and the ship, the
Title:  Jeroboam's boat by the occasional use of its oars contrived to keep
Title:  parallel to the Pequod, as she heavily forged through the sea (for by
Title:  this time it blew very fresh), with her main-topsail aback; though,
Title:  indeed, at times by the sudden onset of a large rolling wave, the
Title:  boat would be pushed some way ahead; but would be soon skilfully
Title:  brought to her proper bearings again.  Subject to this, and other the
Title:  like interruptions now and then, a conversation was sustained between
Title:  the two parties; but at intervals not without still another
Title:  interruption of a very different sort.
Title:  
Title:  Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam's boat, was a man of a singular
Title:  appearance, even in that wild whaling life where individual
Title:  notabilities make up all totalities.  He was a small, short, youngish
Title:  man, sprinkled all over his face with freckles, and wearing redundant
Title:  yellow hair.  A long-skirted, cabalistically-cut coat of a faded
Title:  walnut tinge enveloped him; the overlapping sleeves of which were
Title:  rolled up on his wrists.  A deep, settled, fanatic delirium was in
Title:  his eyes.
Title:  
Title:  So soon as this figure had been first descried, Stubb had
Title:  exclaimed--"That's he! that's he!--the long-togged scaramouch the
Title:  Town-Ho's company told us of!"  Stubb here alluded to a strange story
Title:  told of the Jeroboam, and a certain man among her crew, some time
Title:  previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho.  According to this
Title:  account and what was subsequently learned, it seemed that the
Title:  scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost
Title:  everybody in the Jeroboam.  His story was this:
Title:  
Title:  He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna
Title:  Shakers, where he had been a great prophet; in their cracked, secret
Title:  meetings having several times descended from heaven by the way of a
Title:  trap-door, announcing the speedy opening of the seventh vial, which
Title:  he carried in his vest-pocket; but, which, instead of containing
Title:  gunpowder, was supposed to be charged with laudanum.  A strange,
Title:  apostolic whim having seized him, he had left Neskyeuna for
Title:  Nantucket, where, with that cunning peculiar to craziness, he assumed
Title:  a steady, common-sense exterior, and offered himself as a green-hand
Title:  candidate for the Jeroboam's whaling voyage.  They engaged him; but
Title:  straightway upon the ship's getting out of sight of land, his
Title:  insanity broke out in a freshet.  He announced himself as the
Title:  archangel Gabriel, and commanded the captain to jump overboard.  He
Title:  published his manifesto, whereby he set himself forth as the
Title:  deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica.
Title:  The unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things;--the
Title:  dark, daring play of his sleepless, excited imagination, and all the
Title:  preternatural terrors of real delirium, united to invest this Gabriel
Title:  in the minds of the majority of the ignorant crew, with an atmosphere
Title:  of sacredness.  Moreover, they were afraid of him.  As such a man,
Title:  however, was not of much practical use in the ship, especially as he
Title:  refused to work except when he pleased, the incredulous captain would
Title:  fain have been rid of him; but apprised that that individual's
Title:  intention was to land him in the first convenient port, the archangel
Title:  forthwith opened all his seals and vials--devoting the ship and all
Title:  hands to unconditional perdition, in case this intention was carried
Title:  out.  So strongly did he work upon his disciples among the crew, that
Title:  at last in a body they went to the captain and told him if Gabriel
Title:  was sent from the ship, not a man of them would remain.  He was
Title:  therefore forced to relinquish his plan.  Nor would they permit
Title:  Gabriel to be any way maltreated, say or do what he would; so that it
Title:  came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship.  The
Title:  consequence of all this was, that the archangel cared little or
Title:  nothing for the captain and mates; and since the epidemic had broken
Title:  out, he carried a higher hand than ever; declaring that the plague,
Title:  as he called it, was at his sole command; nor should it be stayed but
Title:  according to his good pleasure.  The sailors, mostly poor devils,
Title:  cringed, and some of them fawned before him; in obedience to his
Title:  instructions, sometimes rendering him personal homage, as to a god.
Title:  Such things may seem incredible; but, however wondrous, they are
Title:  true.  Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to
Title:  the measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself, as his
Title:  measureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others.  But
Title:  it is time to return to the Pequod.
Title:  
Title:  "I fear not thy epidemic, man," said Ahab from the bulwarks, to
Title:  Captain Mayhew, who stood in the boat's stern; "come on board."
Title:  
Title:  But now Gabriel started to his feet.
Title:  
Title:  "Think, think of the fevers, yellow and bilious!  Beware of the
Title:  horrible plague!"
Title:  
Title:  "Gabriel!  Gabriel!" cried Captain Mayhew; "thou must either--"  But
Title:  that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead, and its
Title:  seethings drowned all speech.
Title:  
Title:  "Hast thou seen the White Whale?" demanded Ahab, when the boat
Title:  drifted back.
Title:  
Title:  "Think, think of thy whale-boat, stoven and sunk!  Beware of the
Title:  horrible tail!"
Title:  
Title:  "I tell thee again, Gabriel, that--"  But again the boat tore ahead
Title:  as if dragged by fiends.  Nothing was said for some moments, while a
Title:  succession of riotous waves rolled by, which by one of those
Title:  occasional caprices of the seas were tumbling, not heaving it.
Title:  Meantime, the hoisted sperm whale's head jogged about very violently,
Title:  and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than
Title:  his archangel nature seemed to warrant.
Title:  
Title:  When this interlude was over, Captain Mayhew began a dark story
Title:  concerning Moby Dick; not, however, without frequent interruptions
Title:  from Gabriel, whenever his name was mentioned, and the crazy sea that
Title:  seemed leagued with him.
Title:  
Title:  It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home, when upon
Title:  speaking a whale-ship, her people were reliably apprised of the
Title:  existence of Moby Dick, and the havoc he had made.  Greedily sucking
Title:  in this intelligence, Gabriel solemnly warned the captain against
Title:  attacking the White Whale, in case the monster should be seen; in his
Title:  gibbering insanity, pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a being
Title:  than the Shaker God incarnated; the Shakers receiving the Bible.  But
Title:  when, some year or two afterwards, Moby Dick was fairly sighted from
Title:  the mast-heads, Macey, the chief mate, burned with ardour to encounter
Title:  him; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the
Title:  opportunity, despite all the archangel's denunciations and
Title:  forewarnings, Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat.
Title:  With them he pushed off; and, after much weary pulling, and many
Title:  perilous, unsuccessful onsets, he at last succeeded in getting one
Title:  iron fast.  Meantime, Gabriel, ascending to the main-royal mast-head,
Title:  was tossing one arm in frantic gestures, and hurling forth prophecies
Title:  of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his divinity.  Now,
Title:  while Macey, the mate, was standing up in his boat's bow, and with
Title:  all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild
Title:  exclamations upon the whale, and essaying to get a fair chance for
Title:  his poised lance, lo! a broad white shadow rose from the sea; by its
Title:  quick, fanning motion, temporarily taking the breath out of the
Title:  bodies of the oarsmen.  Next instant, the luckless mate, so full of
Title:  furious life, was smitten bodily into the air, and making a long arc
Title:  in his descent, fell into the sea at the distance of about fifty
Title:  yards.  Not a chip of the boat was harmed, nor a hair of any
Title:  oarsman's head; but the mate for ever sank.
Title:  
Title:  It is well to parenthesize here, that of the fatal accidents in the
Title:  Sperm-Whale Fishery, this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any.
Title:  Sometimes, nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated;
Title:  oftener the boat's bow is knocked off, or the thigh-board, in which
Title:  the headsman stands, is torn from its place and accompanies the body.
Title:  But strangest of all is the circumstance, that in more instances
Title:  than one, when the body has been recovered, not a single mark of
Title:  violence is discernible; the man being stark dead.
Title:  
Title:  The whole calamity, with the falling form of Macey, was plainly
Title:  descried from the ship.  Raising a piercing shriek--"The vial! the
Title:  vial!"  Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further
Title:  hunting of the whale.  This terrible event clothed the archangel with
Title:  added influence; because his credulous disciples believed that he had
Title:  specifically fore-announced it, instead of only making a general
Title:  prophecy, which any one might have done, and so have chanced to hit
Title:  one of many marks in the wide margin allowed.  He became a nameless
Title:  terror to the ship.
Title:  
Title:  Mayhew having concluded his narration, Ahab put such questions to
Title:  him, that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he
Title:  intended to hunt the White Whale, if opportunity should offer.  To
Title:  which Ahab answered--"Aye."  Straightway, then, Gabriel once more
Title:  started to his feet, glaring upon the old man, and vehemently
Title:  exclaimed, with downward pointed finger--"Think, think of the
Title:  blasphemer--dead, and down there!--beware of the blasphemer's end!"
Title:  
Title:  Ahab stolidly turned aside; then said to Mayhew, "Captain, I have
Title:  just bethought me of my letter-bag; there is a letter for one of thy
Title:  officers, if I mistake not.  Starbuck, look over the bag."
Title:  
Title:  Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various
Title:  ships, whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed,
Title:  depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans.
Title:  Thus, most letters never reach their mark; and many are only
Title:  received after attaining an age of two or three years or more.
Title:  
Title:  Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand.  It was sorely
Title:  tumbled, damp, and covered with a dull, spotted, green mould, in
Title:  consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin.  Of such a
Title:  letter, Death himself might well have been the post-boy.
Title:  
Title:  "Can'st not read it?" cried Ahab.  "Give it me, man.  Aye, aye, it's
Title:  but a dim scrawl;--what's this?"  As he was studying it out, Starbuck
Title:  took a long cutting-spade pole, and with his knife slightly split the
Title:  end, to insert the letter there, and in that way, hand it to the
Title:  boat, without its coming any closer to the ship.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, Ahab holding the letter, muttered, "Mr. Har--yes, Mr.
Title:  Harry--(a woman's pinny hand,--the man's wife, I'll wager)--Aye--Mr.
Title:  Harry Macey, Ship Jeroboam;--why it's Macey, and he's dead!"
Title:  
Title:  "Poor fellow! poor fellow! and from his wife," sighed Mayhew; "but
Title:  let me have it."
Title:  
Title:  "Nay, keep it thyself," cried Gabriel to Ahab; "thou art soon going
Title:  that way."
Title:  
Title:  "Curses throttle thee!" yelled Ahab.  "Captain Mayhew, stand by now
Title:  to receive it"; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck's hands,
Title:  he caught it in the slit of the pole, and reached it over towards the
Title:  boat.  But as he did so, the oarsmen expectantly desisted from
Title:  rowing; the boat drifted a little towards the ship's stern; so that,
Title:  as if by magic, the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel's eager
Title:  hand.  He clutched it in an instant, seized the boat-knife, and
Title:  impaling the letter on it, sent it thus loaded back into the ship.
Title:  It fell at Ahab's feet.  Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to
Title:  give way with their oars, and in that manner the mutinous boat
Title:  rapidly shot away from the Pequod.
Title:  
Title:  As, after this interlude, the seamen resumed their work upon the
Title:  jacket of the whale, many strange things were hinted in reference to
Title:  this wild affair.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 72
Title:  
Title:  The Monkey-Rope.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale,
Title:  there is much running backwards and forwards among the crew.  Now
Title:  hands are wanted here, and then again hands are wanted there.  There
Title:  is no staying in any one place; for at one and the same time
Title:  everything has to be done everywhere.  It is much the same with him
Title:  who endeavors the description of the scene.  We must now retrace our
Title:  way a little.  It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in
Title:  the whale's back, the blubber-hook was inserted into the original
Title:  hole there cut by the spades of the mates.  But how did so clumsy and
Title:  weighty a mass as that same hook get fixed in that hole?  It was
Title:  inserted there by my particular friend Queequeg, whose duty it was,
Title:  as harpooneer, to descend upon the monster's back for the special
Title:  purpose referred to.  But in very many cases, circumstances require
Title:  that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the whole tensing
Title:  or stripping operation is concluded.  The whale, be it observed, lies
Title:  almost entirely submerged, excepting the immediate parts operated
Title:  upon.  So down there, some ten feet below the level of the deck, the
Title:  poor harpooneer flounders about, half on the whale and half in the
Title:  water, as the vast mass revolves like a tread-mill beneath him.  On
Title:  the occasion in question, Queequeg figured in the Highland costume--a
Title:  shirt and socks--in which to my eyes, at least, he appeared to
Title:  uncommon advantage; and no one had a better chance to observe him, as
Title:  will presently be seen.
Title:  
Title:  Being the savage's bowsman, that is, the person who pulled the
Title:  bow-oar in his boat (the second one from forward), it was my cheerful
Title:  duty to attend upon him while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon
Title:  the dead whale's back.  You have seen Italian organ-boys holding a
Title:  dancing-ape by a long cord.  Just so, from the ship's steep side, did
Title:  I hold Queequeg down there in the sea, by what is technically called
Title:  in the fishery a monkey-rope, attached to a strong strip of canvas
Title:  belted round his waist.
Title:  
Title:  It was a humorously perilous business for both of us.  For, before we
Title:  proceed further, it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at
Title:  both ends; fast to Queequeg's broad canvas belt, and fast to my
Title:  narrow leather one.  So that for better or for worse, we two, for the
Title:  time, were wedded; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more,
Title:  then both usage and honour demanded, that instead of cutting the cord,
Title:  it should drag me down in his wake.  So, then, an elongated Siamese
Title:  ligature united us.  Queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother;
Title:  nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the
Title:  hempen bond entailed.
Title:  
Title:  So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then,
Title:  that while earnestly watching his motions, I seemed distinctly to
Title:  perceive that my own individuality was now merged in a joint stock
Title:  company of two; that my free will had received a mortal wound; and
Title:  that another's mistake or misfortune might plunge innocent me into
Title:  unmerited disaster and death.  Therefore, I saw that here was a sort
Title:  of interregnum in Providence; for its even-handed equity never could
Title:  have so gross an injustice.  And yet still further pondering--while I
Title:  jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship, which would
Title:  threaten to jam him--still further pondering, I say, I saw that this
Title:  situation of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that
Title:  breathes; only, in most cases, he, one way or other, has this Siamese
Title:  connexion with a plurality of other mortals.  If your banker breaks,
Title:  you snap; if your apothecary by mistake sends you poison in your
Title:  pills, you die.  True, you may say that, by exceeding caution, you
Title:  may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil chances of
Title:  life.  But handle Queequeg's monkey-rope heedfully as I would,
Title:  sometimes he jerked it so, that I came very near sliding overboard.
Title:  Nor could I possibly forget that, do what I would, I only had the
Title:  management of one end of it.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *The monkey-rope is found in all whalers; but it was only in the
Title:  Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together.  This
Title:  improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man
Title:  than Stubb, in order to afford the imperilled harpooneer the strongest
Title:  possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his
Title:  monkey-rope holder.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the
Title:  whale and the ship--where he would occasionally fall, from the
Title:  incessant rolling and swaying of both.  But this was not the only
Title:  jamming jeopardy he was exposed to.  Unappalled by the massacre made
Title:  upon them during the night, the sharks now freshly and more keenly
Title:  allured by the before pent blood which began to flow from the
Title:  carcass--the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive.
Title:  
Title:  And right in among those sharks was Queequeg; who often pushed them
Title:  aside with his floundering feet.  A thing altogether incredible were
Title:  it not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale, the otherwise
Title:  miscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom touch a man.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, it may well be believed that since they have such a
Title:  ravenous finger in the pie, it is deemed but wise to look sharp to
Title:  them.  Accordingly, besides the monkey-rope, with which I now and
Title:  then jerked the poor fellow from too close a vicinity to the maw of
Title:  what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark--he was provided with still
Title:  another protection.  Suspended over the side in one of the stages,
Title:  Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple of
Title:  keen whale-spades, wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they
Title:  could reach.  This procedure of theirs, to be sure, was very
Title:  disinterested and benevolent of them.  They meant Queequeg's best
Title:  happiness, I admit; but in their hasty zeal to befriend him, and from
Title:  the circumstance that both he and the sharks were at times half
Title:  hidden by the blood-muddled water, those indiscreet spades of theirs
Title:  would come nearer amputating a leg than a tall.  But poor Queequeg, I
Title:  suppose, straining and gasping there with that great iron hook--poor
Title:  Queequeg, I suppose, only prayed to his Yojo, and gave up his life
Title:  into the hands of his gods.
Title:  
Title:  Well, well, my dear comrade and twin-brother, thought I, as I drew in
Title:  and then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea--what matters
Title:  it, after all?  Are you not the precious image of each and all of us
Title:  men in this whaling world?  That unsounded ocean you gasp in, is
Title:  Life; those sharks, your foes; those spades, your friends; and what
Title:  between sharks and spades you are in a sad pickle and peril, poor
Title:  lad.
Title:  
Title:  But courage! there is good cheer in store for you, Queequeg.  For
Title:  now, as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at
Title:  last climbs up the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily
Title:  trembling over the side; the steward advances, and with a benevolent,
Title:  consolatory glance hands him--what?  Some hot Cognac?  No! hands him,
Title:  ye gods! hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water!
Title:  
Title:  "Ginger?  Do I smell ginger?" suspiciously asked Stubb, coming near.
Title:  "Yes, this must be ginger," peering into the as yet untasted cup.
Title:  Then standing as if incredulous for a while, he calmly walked towards
Title:  the astonished steward slowly saying, "Ginger? ginger? and will you
Title:  have the goodness to tell me, Mr. Dough-Boy, where lies the virtue of
Title:  ginger?  Ginger! is ginger the sort of fuel you use, Dough-boy, to
Title:  kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal?  Ginger!--what the devil is
Title:  ginger?--sea-coal? firewood?--lucifer
Title:  matches?--tinder?--gunpowder?--what the devil is ginger, I say, that
Title:  you offer this cup to our poor Queequeg here."
Title:  
Title:  "There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this
Title:  business," he suddenly added, now approaching Starbuck, who had just
Title:  come from forward.  "Will you look at that kannakin, sir; smell of
Title:  it, if you please."  Then watching the mate's countenance, he added,
Title:  "The steward, Mr. Starbuck, had the face to offer that calomel and
Title:  jalap to Queequeg, there, this instant off the whale.  Is the steward
Title:  an apothecary, sir? and may I ask whether this is the sort of bitters
Title:  by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man?"
Title:  
Title:  "I trust not," said Starbuck, "it is poor stuff enough."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, steward," cried Stubb, "we'll teach you to drug it
Title:  harpooneer; none of your apothecary's medicine here; you want to
Title:  poison us, do ye?  You have got out insurances on our lives and want
Title:  to murder us all, and pocket the proceeds, do ye?"
Title:  
Title:  "It was not me," cried Dough-Boy, "it was Aunt Charity that brought
Title:  the ginger on board; and bade me never give the harpooneers any
Title:  spirits, but only this ginger-jub--so she called it."
Title:  
Title:  "Ginger-jub! you gingerly rascal! take that! and run along with ye to
Title:  the lockers, and get something better.  I hope I do no wrong, Mr.
Title:  Starbuck.  It is the captain's orders--grog for the harpooneer on a
Title:  whale."
Title:  
Title:  "Enough," replied Starbuck, "only don't hit him again, but--"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, I never hurt when I hit, except when I hit a whale or something
Title:  of that sort; and this fellow's a weazel.  What were you about
Title:  saying, sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "Only this: go down with him, and get what thou wantest thyself."
Title:  
Title:  When Stubb reappeared, he came with a dark flask in one hand, and a
Title:  sort of tea-caddy in the other.  The first contained strong spirits,
Title:  and was handed to Queequeg; the second was Aunt Charity's gift, and
Title:  that was freely given to the waves.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 73
Title:  
Title:  Stubb and Flask Kill a Right Whale; and Then Have a Talk Over Him.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale's
Title:  prodigious head hanging to the Pequod's side.  But we must let it
Title:  continue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to
Title:  it.  For the present other matters press, and the best we can do now
Title:  for the head, is to pray heaven the tackles may hold.
Title:  
Title:  Now, during the past night and forenoon, the Pequod had gradually
Title:  drifted into a sea, which, by its occasional patches of yellow brit,
Title:  gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales, a species of the
Title:  Leviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurking
Title:  anywhere near.  And though all hands commonly disdained the capture
Title:  of those inferior creatures; and though the Pequod was not
Title:  commissioned to cruise for them at all, and though she had passed
Title:  numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat; yet now
Title:  that a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded, to the
Title:  surprise of all, the announcement was made that a Right Whale should
Title:  be captured that day, if opportunity offered.
Title:  
Title:  Nor was this long wanting.  Tall spouts were seen to leeward; and two
Title:  boats, Stubb's and Flask's, were detached in pursuit.  Pulling
Title:  further and further away, they at last became almost invisible to the
Title:  men at the mast-head.  But suddenly in the distance, they saw a great
Title:  heap of tumultuous white water, and soon after news came from aloft
Title:  that one or both the boats must be fast.  An interval passed and the
Title:  boats were in plain sight, in the act of being dragged right towards
Title:  the ship by the towing whale.  So close did the monster come to the
Title:  hull, that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice; but suddenly
Title:  going down in a maelstrom, within three rods of the planks, he wholly
Title:  disappeared from view, as if diving under the keel.  "Cut, cut!" was
Title:  the cry from the ship to the boats, which, for one instant, seemed on
Title:  the point of being brought with a deadly dash against the vessel's
Title:  side.  But having plenty of line yet in the tubs, and the whale not
Title:  sounding very rapidly, they paid out abundance of rope, and at the
Title:  same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of the ship.
Title:  For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical; for while
Title:  they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction, and still
Title:  plied their oars in another, the contending strain threatened to take
Title:  them under.  But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain.
Title:  And they stuck to it till they did gain it; when instantly, a swift
Title:  tremor was felt running like lightning along the keel, as the
Title:  strained line, scraping beneath the ship, suddenly rose to view under
Title:  her bows, snapping and quivering; and so flinging off its drippings,
Title:  that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water, while the
Title:  whale beyond also rose to sight, and once more the boats were free to
Title:  fly.  But the fagged whale abated his speed, and blindly altering his
Title:  course, went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after
Title:  him, so that they performed a complete circuit.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, they hauled more and more upon their lines, till close
Title:  flanking him on both sides, Stubb answered Flask with lance for
Title:  lance; and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went, while the
Title:  multitudes of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm Whale's
Title:  body, rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled, thirstily drinking
Title:  at every new gash, as the eager Israelites did at the new bursting
Title:  fountains that poured from the smitten rock.
Title:  
Title:  At last his spout grew thick, and with a frightful roll and vomit, he
Title:  turned upon his back a corpse.
Title:  
Title:  While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his
Title:  flukes, and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing,
Title:  some conversation ensued between them.
Title:  
Title:  "I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard," said
Title:  Stubb, not without some disgust at the thought of having to do with
Title:  so ignoble a leviathan.
Title:  
Title:  "Wants with it?" said Flask, coiling some spare line in the boat's
Title:  bow, "did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm
Title:  Whale's head hoisted on her starboard side, and at the same time a
Title:  Right Whale's on the larboard; did you never hear, Stubb, that that
Title:  ship can never afterwards capsize?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why not?
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know, but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying
Title:  so, and he seems to know all about ships' charms.  But I sometimes
Title:  think he'll charm the ship to no good at last.  I don't half like
Title:  that chap, Stubb.  Did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sort
Title:  of carved into a snake's head, Stubb?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sink him!  I never look at him at all; but if ever I get a chance of
Title:  a dark night, and he standing hard by the bulwarks, and no one by;
Title:  look down there, Flask"--pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion
Title:  of both hands--"Aye, will I!  Flask, I take that Fedallah to be the
Title:  devil in disguise.  Do you believe that cock and bull story about his
Title:  having been stowed away on board ship?  He's the devil, I say.  The
Title:  reason why you don't see his tail, is because he tucks it up out of
Title:  sight; he carries it coiled away in his pocket, I guess.  Blast him!
Title:  now that I think of it, he's always wanting oakum to stuff into the
Title:  toes of his boots."
Title:  
Title:  "He sleeps in his boots, don't he?  He hasn't got any hammock; but
Title:  I've seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging."
Title:  
Title:  "No doubt, and it's because of his cursed tail; he coils it down, do
Title:  ye see, in the eye of the rigging."
Title:  
Title:  "What's the old man have so much to do with him for?"
Title:  
Title:  "Striking up a swap or a bargain, I suppose."
Title:  
Title:  "Bargain?--about what?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, do ye see, the old man is hard bent after that White Whale, and
Title:  the devil there is trying to come round him, and get him to swap away
Title:  his silver watch, or his soul, or something of that sort, and then
Title:  he'll surrender Moby Dick."
Title:  
Title:  "Pooh!  Stubb, you are skylarking; how can Fedallah do that?"
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know, Flask, but the devil is a curious chap, and a wicked
Title:  one, I tell ye.  Why, they say as how he went a sauntering into the
Title:  old flag-ship once, switching his tail about devilish easy and
Title:  gentlemanlike, and inquiring if the old governor was at home.  Well,
Title:  he was at home, and asked the devil what he wanted.  The devil,
Title:  switching his hoofs, up and says, 'I want John.'  'What for?' says
Title:  the old governor.  'What business is that of yours,' says the devil,
Title:  getting mad,--'I want to use him.'  'Take him,' says the
Title:  governor--and by the Lord, Flask, if the devil didn't give John the
Title:  Asiatic cholera before he got through with him, I'll eat this whale
Title:  in one mouthful.  But look sharp--ain't you all ready there?  Well,
Title:  then, pull ahead, and let's get the whale alongside."
Title:  
Title:  "I think I remember some such story as you were telling," said Flask,
Title:  when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden
Title:  towards the ship, "but I can't remember where."
Title:  
Title:  "Three Spaniards?  Adventures of those three bloody-minded soladoes?
Title:  Did ye read it there, Flask?  I guess ye did?"
Title:  
Title:  "No: never saw such a book; heard of it, though.  But now, tell me,
Title:  Stubb, do you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now,
Title:  was the same you say is now on board the Pequod?"
Title:  
Title:  "Am I the same man that helped kill this whale?  Doesn't the devil
Title:  live for ever; who ever heard that the devil was dead?  Did you ever
Title:  see any parson a wearing mourning for the devil?  And if the devil
Title:  has a latch-key to get into the admiral's cabin, don't you suppose he
Title:  can crawl into a porthole?  Tell me that, Mr. Flask?"
Title:  
Title:  "How old do you suppose Fedallah is, Stubb?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you see that mainmast there?" pointing to the ship; "well, that's
Title:  the figure one; now take all the hoops in the Pequod's hold, and
Title:  string along in a row with that mast, for oughts, do you see; well,
Title:  that wouldn't begin to be Fedallah's age.  Nor all the coopers in
Title:  creation couldn't show hoops enough to make oughts enough."
Title:  
Title:  "But see here, Stubb, I thought you a little boasted just now, that
Title:  you meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss, if you got a good chance.
Title:  Now, if he's so old as all those hoops of yours come to, and if he is
Title:  going to live for ever, what good will it do to pitch him
Title:  overboard--tell me that?
Title:  
Title:  "Give him a good ducking, anyhow."
Title:  
Title:  "But he'd crawl back."
Title:  
Title:  "Duck him again; and keep ducking him."
Title:  
Title:  "Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you, though--yes,
Title:  and drown you--what then?"
Title:  
Title:  "I should like to see him try it; I'd give him such a pair of black
Title:  eyes that he wouldn't dare to show his face in the admiral's cabin
Title:  again for a long while, let alone down in the orlop there, where he
Title:  lives, and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much.
Title:  Damn the devil, Flask; so you suppose I'm afraid of the devil?  Who's
Title:  afraid of him, except the old governor who daresn't catch him and put
Title:  him in double-darbies, as he deserves, but lets him go about
Title:  kidnapping people; aye, and signed a bond with him, that all the
Title:  people the devil kidnapped, he'd roast for him?  There's a governor!"
Title:  
Title:  "Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do I suppose it?  You'll know it before long, Flask.  But I am going
Title:  now to keep a sharp look-out on him; and if I see anything very
Title:  suspicious going on, I'll just take him by the nape of his neck, and
Title:  say--Look here, Beelzebub, you don't do it; and if he makes any fuss,
Title:  by the Lord I'll make a grab into his pocket for his tail, take it to
Title:  the capstan, and give him such a wrenching and heaving, that his tail
Title:  will come short off at the stump--do you see; and then, I rather
Title:  guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion, he'll sneak
Title:  off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his
Title:  legs."
Title:  
Title:  "And what will you do with the tail, Stubb?"
Title:  
Title:  "Do with it?  Sell it for an ox whip when we get home;--what else?"
Title:  
Title:  "Now, do you mean what you say, and have been saying all along,
Title:  Stubb?"
Title:  
Title:  "Mean or not mean, here we are at the ship."
Title:  
Title:  The boats were here hailed, to tow the whale on the larboard side,
Title:  where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared for
Title:  securing him.
Title:  
Title:  "Didn't I tell you so?" said Flask; "yes, you'll soon see this right
Title:  whale's head hoisted up opposite that parmacetti's."
Title:  
Title:  In good time, Flask's saying proved true.  As before, the Pequod
Title:  steeply leaned over towards the sperm whale's head, now, by the
Title:  counterpoise of both heads, she regained her even keel; though sorely
Title:  strained, you may well believe.  So, when on one side you hoist in
Title:  Locke's head, you go over that way; but now, on the other side, hoist
Title:  in Kant's and you come back again; but in very poor plight.  Thus,
Title:  some minds for ever keep trimming boat.  Oh, ye foolish! throw all
Title:  these thunder-heads overboard, and then you will float light and
Title:  right.
Title:  
Title:  In disposing of the body of a right whale, when brought alongside the
Title:  ship, the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the
Title:  case of a sperm whale; only, in the latter instance, the head is cut
Title:  off whole, but in the former the lips and tongue are separately
Title:  removed and hoisted on deck, with all the well known black bone
Title:  attached to what is called the crown-piece.  But nothing like this,
Title:  in the present case, had been done.  The carcases of both whales had
Title:  dropped astern; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a mule
Title:  carrying a pair of overburdening panniers.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale's head, and ever
Title:  and anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his
Title:  own hand.  And Ahab chanced so to stand, that the Parsee occupied his
Title:  shadow; while, if the Parsee's shadow was there at all it seemed only
Title:  to blend with, and lengthen Ahab's.  As the crew toiled on,
Title:  Laplandish speculations were bandied among them, concerning all these
Title:  passing things.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 74
Title:  
Title:  The Sperm Whale's Head--Contrasted View.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Here, now, are two great whales, laying their heads together; let us
Title:  join them, and lay together our own.
Title:  
Title:  Of the grand order of folio leviathans, the Sperm Whale and the Right
Title:  Whale are by far the most noteworthy.  They are the only whales
Title:  regularly hunted by man.  To the Nantucketer, they present the two
Title:  extremes of all the known varieties of the whale.  As the external
Title:  difference between them is mainly observable in their heads; and as a
Title:  head of each is this moment hanging from the Pequod's side; and as we
Title:  may freely go from one to the other, by merely stepping across the
Title:  deck:--where, I should like to know, will you obtain a better chance
Title:  to study practical cetology than here?
Title:  
Title:  In the first place, you are struck by the general contrast between
Title:  these heads.  Both are massive enough in all conscience; but there
Title:  is a certain mathematical symmetry in the Sperm Whale's which the
Title:  Right Whale's sadly lacks.  There is more character in the Sperm
Title:  Whale's head.  As you behold it, you involuntarily yield the immense
Title:  superiority to him, in point of pervading dignity.  In the present
Title:  instance, too, this dignity is heightened by the pepper and salt
Title:  colour of his head at the summit, giving token of advanced age and
Title:  large experience.  In short, he is what the fishermen technically
Title:  call a "grey-headed whale."
Title:  
Title:  Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads--namely, the
Title:  two most important organs, the eye and the ear.  Far back on the side
Title:  of the head, and low down, near the angle of either whale's jaw, if
Title:  you narrowly search, you will at last see a lashless eye, which you
Title:  would fancy to be a young colt's eye; so out of all proportion is it
Title:  to the magnitude of the head.
Title:  
Title:  Now, from this peculiar sideway position of the whale's eyes, it is
Title:  plain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead, no more
Title:  than he can one exactly astern.  In a word, the position of the
Title:  whale's eyes corresponds to that of a man's ears; and you may fancy,
Title:  for yourself, how it would fare with you, did you sideways survey
Title:  objects through your ears.  You would find that you could only
Title:  command some thirty degrees of vision in advance of the straight
Title:  side-line of sight; and about thirty more behind it.  If your
Title:  bitterest foe were walking straight towards you, with dagger uplifted
Title:  in broad day, you would not be able to see him, any more than if he
Title:  were stealing upon you from behind.  In a word, you would have two
Title:  backs, so to speak; but, at the same time, also, two fronts (side
Title:  fronts): for what is it that makes the front of a man--what, indeed,
Title:  but his eyes?
Title:  
Title:  Moreover, while in most other animals that I can now think of, the
Title:  eyes are so planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power, so
Title:  as to produce one picture and not two to the brain; the peculiar
Title:  position of the whale's eyes, effectually divided as they are by many
Title:  cubic feet of solid head, which towers between them like a great
Title:  mountain separating two lakes in valleys; this, of course, must
Title:  wholly separate the impressions which each independent organ imparts.
Title:  The whale, therefore, must see one distinct picture on this side,
Title:  and another distinct picture on that side; while all between must be
Title:  profound darkness and nothingness to him.  Man may, in effect, be
Title:  said to look out on the world from a sentry-box with two joined
Title:  sashes for his window.  But with the whale, these two sashes are
Title:  separately inserted, making two distinct windows, but sadly impairing
Title:  the view.  This peculiarity of the whale's eyes is a thing always to
Title:  be borne in mind in the fishery; and to be remembered by the reader
Title:  in some subsequent scenes.
Title:  
Title:  A curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning this
Title:  visual matter as touching the Leviathan.  But I must be content with
Title:  a hint.  So long as a man's eyes are open in the light, the act of
Title:  seeing is involuntary; that is, he cannot then help mechanically
Title:  seeing whatever objects are before him.  Nevertheless, any one's
Title:  experience will teach him, that though he can take in an
Title:  undiscriminating sweep of things at one glance, it is quite
Title:  impossible for him, attentively, and completely, to examine any two
Title:  things--however large or however small--at one and the same instant
Title:  of time; never mind if they lie side by side and touch each other.
Title:  But if you now come to separate these two objects, and surround each
Title:  by a circle of profound darkness; then, in order to see one of them,
Title:  in such a manner as to bring your mind to bear on it, the other will
Title:  be utterly excluded from your contemporary consciousness.  How is it,
Title:  then, with the whale?  True, both his eyes, in themselves, must
Title:  simultaneously act; but is his brain so much more comprehensive,
Title:  combining, and subtle than man's, that he can at the same moment of
Title:  time attentively examine two distinct prospects, one on one side of
Title:  him, and the other in an exactly opposite direction?  If he can, then
Title:  is it as marvellous a thing in him, as if a man were able
Title:  simultaneously to go through the demonstrations of two distinct
Title:  problems in Euclid.  Nor, strictly investigated, is there any
Title:  incongruity in this comparison.
Title:  
Title:  It may be but an idle whim, but it has always seemed to me, that the
Title:  extraordinary vacillations of movement displayed by some whales when
Title:  beset by three or four boats; the timidity and liability to queer
Title:  frights, so common to such whales; I think that all this indirectly
Title:  proceeds from the helpless perplexity of volition, in which their
Title:  divided and diametrically opposite powers of vision must involve
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye.  If you are
Title:  an entire stranger to their race, you might hunt over these two heads
Title:  for hours, and never discover that organ.  The ear has no external
Title:  leaf whatever; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert a
Title:  quill, so wondrously minute is it.  It is lodged a little behind the
Title:  eye.  With respect to their ears, this important difference is to be
Title:  observed between the sperm whale and the right.  While the ear of
Title:  the former has an external opening, that of the latter is entirely
Title:  and evenly covered over with a membrane, so as to be quite
Title:  imperceptible from without.
Title:  
Title:  Is it not curious, that so vast a being as the whale should see the
Title:  world through so small an eye, and hear the thunder through an ear
Title:  which is smaller than a hare's?  But if his eyes were broad as the
Title:  lens of Herschel's great telescope; and his ears capacious as the
Title:  porches of cathedrals; would that make him any longer of sight, or
Title:  sharper of hearing?  Not at all.--Why then do you try to "enlarge"
Title:  your mind?  Subtilize it.
Title:  
Title:  Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand,
Title:  cant over the sperm whale's head, that it may lie bottom up;
Title:  then, ascending by a ladder to the summit, have a peep down the
Title:  mouth; and were it not that the body is now completely separated from
Title:  it, with a lantern we might descend into the great Kentucky Mammoth
Title:  Cave of his stomach.  But let us hold on here by this tooth, and look
Title:  about us where we are.  What a really beautiful and chaste-looking
Title:  mouth! from floor to ceiling, lined, or rather papered with a
Title:  glistening white membrane, glossy as bridal satins.
Title:  
Title:  But come out now, and look at this portentous lower jaw, which seems
Title:  like the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box, with the hinge at
Title:  one end, instead of one side.  If you pry it up, so as to get it
Title:  overhead, and expose its rows of teeth, it seems a terrific
Title:  portcullis; and such, alas! it proves to many a poor wight in the
Title:  fishery, upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force.  But far
Title:  more terrible is it to behold, when fathoms down in the sea, you see
Title:  some sulky whale, floating there suspended, with his prodigious jaw,
Title:  some fifteen feet long, hanging straight down at right-angles with
Title:  his body, for all the world like a ship's jib-boom.  This whale is
Title:  not dead; he is only dispirited; out of sorts, perhaps;
Title:  hypochondriac; and so supine, that the hinges of his jaw have
Title:  relaxed, leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight, a
Title:  reproach to all his tribe, who must, no doubt, imprecate lock-jaws
Title:  upon him.
Title:  
Title:  In most cases this lower jaw--being easily unhinged by a practised
Title:  artist--is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of
Title:  extracting the ivory teeth, and furnishing a supply of that hard
Title:  white whalebone with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious
Title:  articles, including canes, umbrella-stocks, and handles to
Title:  riding-whips.
Title:  
Title:  With a long, weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board, as if it were
Title:  an anchor; and when the proper time comes--some few days after the
Title:  other work--Queequeg, Daggoo, and Tashtego, being all accomplished
Title:  dentists, are set to drawing teeth.  With a keen cutting-spade,
Title:  Queequeg lances the gums; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts,
Title:  and a tackle being rigged from aloft, they drag out these teeth, as
Title:  Michigan oxen drag stumps of old oaks out of wild wood lands.  There
Title:  are generally forty-two teeth in all; in old whales, much worn down,
Title:  but undecayed; nor filled after our artificial fashion.  The jaw is
Title:  afterwards sawn into slabs, and piled away like joists for building
Title:  houses.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 75
Title:  
Title:  The Right Whale's Head--Contrasted View.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Crossing the deck, let us now have a good long look at the Right
Title:  Whale's head.
Title:  
Title:  As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale's head may be compared to a
Title:  Roman war-chariot (especially in front, where it is so broadly
Title:  rounded); so, at a broad view, the Right Whale's head bears a rather
Title:  inelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe.  Two hundred
Title:  years ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape to that of a
Title:  shoemaker's last.  And in this same last or shoe, that old woman of
Title:  the nursery tale, with the swarming brood, might very comfortably be
Title:  lodged, she and all her progeny.
Title:  
Title:  But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume
Title:  different aspects, according to your point of view.  If you stand on
Title:  its summit and look at these two F-shaped spoutholes, you would take
Title:  the whole head for an enormous bass-viol, and these spiracles, the
Title:  apertures in its sounding-board.  Then, again, if you fix your eye
Title:  upon this strange, crested, comb-like incrustation on the top of the
Title:  mass--this green, barnacled thing, which the Greenlanders call the
Title:  "crown," and the Southern fishers the "bonnet" of the Right Whale;
Title:  fixing your eyes solely on this, you would take the head for the
Title:  trunk of some huge oak, with a bird's nest in its crotch.  At any
Title:  rate, when you watch those live crabs that nestle here on this
Title:  bonnet, such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you; unless,
Title:  indeed, your fancy has been fixed by the technical term "crown" also
Title:  bestowed upon it; in which case you will take great interest in
Title:  thinking how this mighty monster is actually a diademed king of the
Title:  sea, whose green crown has been put together for him in this
Title:  marvellous manner.  But if this whale be a king, he is a very sulky
Title:  looking fellow to grace a diadem.  Look at that hanging lower lip!
Title:  what a huge sulk and pout is there! a sulk and pout, by carpenter's
Title:  measurement, about twenty feet long and five feet deep; a sulk and
Title:  pout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more.
Title:  
Title:  A great pity, now, that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped.
Title:  The fissure is about a foot across.  Probably the mother during an
Title:  important interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast, when
Title:  earthquakes caused the beach to gape.  Over this lip, as over a
Title:  slippery threshold, we now slide into the mouth.  Upon my word were I
Title:  at Mackinaw, I should take this to be the inside of an Indian wigwam.
Title:  Good Lord! is this the road that Jonah went?  The roof is about
Title:  twelve feet high, and runs to a pretty sharp angle, as if there were
Title:  a regular ridge-pole there; while these ribbed, arched, hairy sides,
Title:  present us with those wondrous, half vertical, scimetar-shaped slats
Title:  of whalebone, say three hundred on a side, which depending from the
Title:  upper part of the head or crown bone, form those Venetian blinds
Title:  which have elsewhere been cursorily mentioned.  The edges of these
Title:  bones are fringed with hairy fibres, through which the Right Whale
Title:  strains the water, and in whose intricacies he retains the small
Title:  fish, when openmouthed he goes through the seas of brit in feeding
Title:  time.  In the central blinds of bone, as they stand in their natural
Title:  order, there are certain curious marks, curves, hollows, and ridges,
Title:  whereby some whalemen calculate the creature's age, as the age of an
Title:  oak by its circular rings.  Though the certainty of this criterion is
Title:  far from demonstrable, yet it has the savor of analogical
Title:  probability.  At any rate, if we yield to it, we must grant a far
Title:  greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance will seem
Title:  reasonable.
Title:  
Title:  In old times, there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies
Title:  concerning these blinds.  One voyager in Purchas calls them the
Title:  wondrous "whiskers" inside of the whale's mouth;* another, "hogs'
Title:  bristles"; a third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the following
Title:  elegant language: "There are about two hundred and fifty fins growing
Title:  on each side of his upper CHOP, which arch over his tongue on each
Title:  side of his mouth."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker,
Title:  or rather a moustache, consisting of a few scattered white hairs on
Title:  the upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw.  Sometimes these
Title:  tufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn
Title:  countenance.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  As every one knows, these same "hogs' bristles," "fins," "whiskers,"
Title:  "blinds," or whatever you please, furnish to the ladies their busks
Title:  and other stiffening contrivances.  But in this particular, the
Title:  demand has long been on the decline.  It was in Queen Anne's time
Title:  that the bone was in its glory, the farthingale being then all the
Title:  fashion.  And as those ancient dames moved about gaily, though in the
Title:  jaws of the whale, as you may say; even so, in a shower, with the
Title:  like thoughtlessness, do we nowadays fly under the same jaws for
Title:  protection; the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone.
Title:  
Title:  But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment, and,
Title:  standing in the Right Whale's mouth, look around you afresh.  Seeing
Title:  all these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about, would you
Title:  not think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ, and gazing
Title:  upon its thousand pipes?  For a carpet to the organ we have a rug of
Title:  the softest Turkey--the tongue, which is glued, as it were, to the
Title:  floor of the mouth.  It is very fat and tender, and apt to tear in
Title:  pieces in hoisting it on deck.  This particular tongue now before us;
Title:  at a passing glance I should say it was a six-barreler; that is, it
Title:  will yield you about that amount of oil.
Title:  
Title:  Ere this, you must have plainly seen the truth of what I started
Title:  with--that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirely
Title:  different heads.  To sum up, then: in the Right Whale's there is no
Title:  great well of sperm; no ivory teeth at all; no long, slender mandible
Title:  of a lower jaw, like the Sperm Whale's.  Nor in the Sperm Whale are
Title:  there any of those blinds of bone; no huge lower lip; and scarcely
Title:  anything of a tongue.  Again, the Right Whale has two external
Title:  spout-holes, the Sperm Whale only one.
Title:  
Title:  Look your last, now, on these venerable hooded heads, while they yet
Title:  lie together; for one will soon sink, unrecorded, in the sea; the
Title:  other will not be very long in following.
Title:  
Title:  Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale's there?  It is the
Title:  same he died with, only some of the longer wrinkles in the forehead
Title:  seem now faded away.  I think his broad brow to be full of a
Title:  prairie-like placidity, born of a speculative indifference as to
Title:  death.  But mark the other head's expression.  See that amazing lower
Title:  lip, pressed by accident against the vessel's side, so as firmly to
Title:  embrace the jaw.  Does not this whole head seem to speak of an
Title:  enormous practical resolution in facing death?  This Right Whale I
Title:  take to have been a Stoic; the Sperm Whale, a Platonian, who might
Title:  have taken up Spinoza in his latter years.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 76
Title:  
Title:  The Battering-Ram.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Ere quitting, for the nonce, the Sperm Whale's head, I would have
Title:  you, as a sensible physiologist, simply--particularly remark its
Title:  front aspect, in all its compacted collectedness.  I would have you
Title:  investigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself some
Title:  unexaggerated, intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power
Title:  may be lodged there.  Here is a vital point; for you must either
Title:  satisfactorily settle this matter with yourself, or for ever remain
Title:  an infidel as to one of the most appalling, but not the less true
Title:  events, perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded history.
Title:  
Title:  You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm
Title:  Whale, the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane
Title:  to the water; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes
Title:  considerably backwards, so as to furnish more of a retreat for the
Title:  long socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw; you observe that
Title:  the mouth is entirely under the head, much in the same way, indeed,
Title:  as though your own mouth were entirely under your chin.  Moreover you
Title:  observe that the whale has no external nose; and that what nose he
Title:  has--his spout hole--is on the top of his head; you observe that his
Title:  eyes and ears are at the sides of his head, nearly one third of his
Title:  entire length from the front.  Wherefore, you must now have perceived
Title:  that the front of the Sperm Whale's head is a dead, blind wall,
Title:  without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever.
Title:  Furthermore, you are now to consider that only in the extreme, lower,
Title:  backward sloping part of the front of the head, is there the
Title:  slightest vestige of bone; and not till you get near twenty feet from
Title:  the forehead do you come to the full cranial development.  So that
Title:  this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad.  Finally, though, as
Title:  will soon be revealed, its contents partly comprise the most delicate
Title:  oil; yet, you are now to be apprised of the nature of the substance
Title:  which so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy.  In some
Title:  previous place I have described to you how the blubber wraps the body
Title:  of the whale, as the rind wraps an orange.  Just so with the head;
Title:  but with this difference: about the head this envelope, though not so
Title:  thick, is of a boneless toughness, inestimable by any man who has not
Title:  handled it.  The severest pointed harpoon, the sharpest lance darted
Title:  by the strongest human arm, impotently rebounds from it.  It is as
Title:  though the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved with horses' hoofs.
Title:  I do not think that any sensation lurks in it.
Title:  
Title:  Bethink yourself also of another thing.  When two large, loaded
Title:  Indiamen chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the
Title:  docks, what do the sailors do?  They do not suspend between them, at
Title:  the point of coming contact, any merely hard substance, like iron or
Title:  wood.  No, they hold there a large, round wad of tow and cork,
Title:  enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide.  That bravely and
Title:  uninjured takes the jam which would have snapped all their oaken
Title:  handspikes and iron crow-bars.  By itself this sufficiently
Title:  illustrates the obvious fact I drive at.  But supplementary to this,
Title:  it has hypothetically occurred to me, that as ordinary fish possess
Title:  what is called a swimming bladder in them, capable, at will, of
Title:  distension or contraction; and as the Sperm Whale, as far as I know,
Title:  has no such provision in him; considering, too, the otherwise
Title:  inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogether
Title:  beneath the surface, and anon swims with it high elevated out of the
Title:  water; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope;
Title:  considering the unique interior of his head; it has hypothetically
Title:  occurred to me, I say, that those mystical lung-celled honeycombs
Title:  there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspected
Title:  connexion with the outer air, so as to be susceptible to atmospheric
Title:  distension and contraction.  If this be so, fancy the
Title:  irresistibleness of that might, to which the most impalpable and
Title:  destructive of all elements contributes.
Title:  
Title:  Now, mark.  Unerringly impelling this dead, impregnable, uninjurable
Title:  wall, and this most buoyant thing within; there swims behind it all a
Title:  mass of tremendous life, only to be adequately estimated as piled
Title:  wood is--by the cord; and all obedient to one volition, as the
Title:  smallest insect.  So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all
Title:  the specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in
Title:  this expansive monster; when I shall show you some of his more
Title:  inconsiderable braining feats; I trust you will have renounced all
Title:  ignorant incredulity, and be ready to abide by this; that though the
Title:  Sperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien, and mixed
Title:  the Atlantic with the Pacific, you would not elevate one hair of your
Title:  eye-brow.  For unless you own the whale, you are but a provincial and
Title:  sentimentalist in Truth.  But clear Truth is a thing for salamander
Title:  giants only to encounter; how small the chances for the provincials
Title:  then?  What befell the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess's
Title:  veil at Lais?
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 77
Title:  
Title:  The Great Heidelburgh Tun.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Now comes the Baling of the Case.  But to comprehend it aright, you
Title:  must know something of the curious internal structure of the thing
Title:  operated upon.
Title:  
Title:  Regarding the Sperm Whale's head as a solid oblong, you may, on an
Title:  inclined plane, sideways divide it into two quoins,* whereof the
Title:  lower is the bony structure, forming the cranium and jaws, and the
Title:  upper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones; its broad forward end
Title:  forming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale.  At the
Title:  middle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin, and
Title:  then you have two almost equal parts, which before were naturally
Title:  divided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *Quoin is not a Euclidean term.  It belongs to the pure nautical
Title:  mathematics.  I know not that it has been defined before.  A quoin is
Title:  a solid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by
Title:  the steep inclination of one side, instead of the mutual tapering of
Title:  both sides.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The lower subdivided part, called the junk, is one immense honeycomb
Title:  of oil, formed by the crossing and recrossing, into ten thousand
Title:  infiltrated cells, of tough elastic white fibres throughout its whole
Title:  extent.  The upper part, known as the Case, may be regarded as the
Title:  great Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale.  And as that famous great
Title:  tierce is mystically carved in front, so the whale's vast plaited
Title:  forehead forms innumerable strange devices for the emblematical
Title:  adornment of his wondrous tun.  Moreover, as that of Heidelburgh was
Title:  always replenished with the most excellent of the wines of the
Title:  Rhenish valleys, so the tun of the whale contains by far the most
Title:  precious of all his oily vintages; namely, the highly-prized
Title:  spermaceti, in its absolutely pure, limpid, and odoriferous state.
Title:  Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part of
Title:  the creature.  Though in life it remains perfectly fluid, yet, upon
Title:  exposure to the air, after death, it soon begins to concrete; sending
Title:  forth beautiful crystalline shoots, as when the first thin delicate
Title:  ice is just forming in water.  A large whale's case generally yields
Title:  about five hundred gallons of sperm, though from unavoidable
Title:  circumstances, considerable of it is spilled, leaks, and dribbles
Title:  away, or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish business of
Title:  securing what you can.
Title:  
Title:  I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun was
Title:  coated within, but in superlative richness that coating could not
Title:  possibly have compared with the silken pearl-coloured membrane, like
Title:  the lining of a fine pelisse, forming the inner surface of the Sperm
Title:  Whale's case.
Title:  
Title:  It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale
Title:  embraces the entire length of the entire top of the head; and
Title:  since--as has been elsewhere set forth--the head embraces one third
Title:  of the whole length of the creature, then setting that length down at
Title:  eighty feet for a good sized whale, you have more than twenty-six
Title:  feet for the depth of the tun, when it is lengthwise hoisted up and
Title:  down against a ship's side.
Title:  
Title:  As in decapitating the whale, the operator's instrument is brought
Title:  close to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into the
Title:  spermaceti magazine; he has, therefore, to be uncommonly heedful,
Title:  lest a careless, untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and
Title:  wastingly let out its invaluable contents.  It is this decapitated
Title:  end of the head, also, which is at last elevated out of the water,
Title:  and retained in that position by the enormous cutting tackles, whose
Title:  hempen combinations, on one side, make quite a wilderness of ropes in
Title:  that quarter.
Title:  
Title:  Thus much being said, attend now, I pray you, to that marvellous
Title:  and--in this particular instance--almost fatal operation whereby the
Title:  Sperm Whale's great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 78
Title:  
Title:  Cistern and Buckets.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Nimble as a cat, Tashtego mounts aloft; and without altering his
Title:  erect posture, runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm,
Title:  to the part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun.  He has
Title:  carried with him a light tackle called a whip, consisting of only two
Title:  parts, travelling through a single-sheaved block.  Securing this
Title:  block, so that it hangs down from the yard-arm, he swings one end of
Title:  the rope, till it is caught and firmly held by a hand on deck.
Title:  Then, hand-over-hand, down the other part, the Indian drops through
Title:  the air, till dexterously he lands on the summit of the head.
Title:  There--still high elevated above the rest of the company, to whom he
Title:  vivaciously cries--he seems some Turkish Muezzin calling the good
Title:  people to prayers from the top of a tower.  A short-handled sharp
Title:  spade being sent up to him, he diligently searches for the proper
Title:  place to begin breaking into the Tun.  In this business he proceeds
Title:  very heedfully, like a treasure-hunter in some old house, sounding
Title:  the walls to find where the gold is masoned in.  By the time this
Title:  cautious search is over, a stout iron-bound bucket, precisely like a
Title:  well-bucket, has been attached to one end of the whip; while the
Title:  other end, being stretched across the deck, is there held by two or
Title:  three alert hands.  These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of
Title:  the Indian, to whom another person has reached up a very long pole.
Title:  Inserting this pole into the bucket, Tashtego downward guides the
Title:  bucket into the Tun, till it entirely disappears; then giving the
Title:  word to the seamen at the whip, up comes the bucket again, all
Title:  bubbling like a dairy-maid's pail of new milk.  Carefully lowered
Title:  from its height, the full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed
Title:  hand, and quickly emptied into a large tub.  Then remounting aloft,
Title:  it again goes through the same round until the deep cistern will
Title:  yield no more.  Towards the end, Tashtego has to ram his long pole
Title:  harder and harder, and deeper and deeper into the Tun, until some
Title:  twenty feet of the pole have gone down.
Title:  
Title:  Now, the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way;
Title:  several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm; when all at
Title:  once a queer accident happened.  Whether it was that Tashtego, that
Title:  wild Indian, was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment
Title:  his one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head;
Title:  or whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy; or
Title:  whether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so, without
Title:  stating his particular reasons; how it was exactly, there is no
Title:  telling now; but, on a sudden, as the eightieth or ninetieth bucket
Title:  came suckingly up--my God! poor Tashtego--like the twin reciprocating
Title:  bucket in a veritable well, dropped head-foremost down into this
Title:  great Tun of Heidelburgh, and with a horrible oily gurgling, went
Title:  clean out of sight!
Title:  
Title:  "Man overboard!" cried Daggoo, who amid the general consternation
Title:  first came to his senses.  "Swing the bucket this way!" and putting
Title:  one foot into it, so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold
Title:  on the whip itself, the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the
Title:  head, almost before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom.
Title:  Meantime, there was a terrible tumult.  Looking over the side, they
Title:  saw the before lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the
Title:  surface of the sea, as if that moment seized with some momentous
Title:  idea; whereas it was only the poor Indian unconsciously revealing by
Title:  those struggles the perilous depth to which he had sunk.
Title:  
Title:  At this instant, while Daggoo, on the summit of the head, was
Title:  clearing the whip--which had somehow got foul of the great cutting
Title:  tackles--a sharp cracking noise was heard; and to the unspeakable
Title:  horror of all, one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore
Title:  out, and with a vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung, till
Title:  the drunk ship reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg.  The one
Title:  remaining hook, upon which the entire strain now depended, seemed
Title:  every instant to be on the point of giving way; an event still more
Title:  likely from the violent motions of the head.
Title:  
Title:  "Come down, come down!" yelled the seamen to Daggoo, but with one
Title:  hand holding on to the heavy tackles, so that if the head should
Title:  drop, he would still remain suspended; the negro having cleared the
Title:  foul line, rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well,
Title:  meaning that the buried harpooneer should grasp it, and so be hoisted
Title:  out.
Title:  
Title:  "In heaven's name, man," cried Stubb, "are you ramming home a
Title:  cartridge there?--Avast!  How will that help him; jamming that
Title:  iron-bound bucket on top of his head?  Avast, will ye!"
Title:  
Title:  "Stand clear of the tackle!" cried a voice like the bursting of a
Title:  rocket.
Title:  
Title:  Almost in the same instant, with a thunder-boom, the enormous mass
Title:  dropped into the sea, like Niagara's Table-Rock into the whirlpool;
Title:  the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it, to far down her
Title:  glittering copper; and all caught their breath, as half swinging--now
Title:  over the sailors' heads, and now over the water--Daggoo, through a
Title:  thick mist of spray, was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous
Title:  tackles, while poor, buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly down
Title:  to the bottom of the sea!  But hardly had the blinding vapour cleared
Title:  away, when a naked figure with a boarding-sword in his hand, was for
Title:  one swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks.  The next, a loud
Title:  splash announced that my brave Queequeg had dived to the rescue.  One
Title:  packed rush was made to the side, and every eye counted every ripple,
Title:  as moment followed moment, and no sign of either the sinker or the
Title:  diver could be seen.  Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside,
Title:  and pushed a little off from the ship.
Title:  
Title:  "Ha! ha!" cried Daggoo, all at once, from his now quiet, swinging
Title:  perch overhead; and looking further off from the side, we saw an arm
Title:  thrust upright from the blue waves; a sight strange to see, as an arm
Title:  thrust forth from the grass over a grave.
Title:  
Title:  "Both! both!--it is both!"--cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout;
Title:  and soon after, Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand,
Title:  and with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian.  Drawn into
Title:  the waiting boat, they were quickly brought to the deck; but Tashtego
Title:  was long in coming to, and Queequeg did not look very brisk.
Title:  
Title:  Now, how had this noble rescue been accomplished?  Why, diving after
Title:  the slowly descending head, Queequeg with his keen sword had made
Title:  side lunges near its bottom, so as to scuttle a large hole there;
Title:  then dropping his sword, had thrust his long arm far inwards and
Title:  upwards, and so hauled out poor Tash by the head.  He averred, that
Title:  upon first thrusting in for him, a leg was presented; but well
Title:  knowing that that was not as it ought to be, and might occasion great
Title:  trouble;--he had thrust back the leg, and by a dexterous heave and
Title:  toss, had wrought a somerset upon the Indian; so that with the next
Title:  trial, he came forth in the good old way--head foremost.  As for the
Title:  great head itself, that was doing as well as could be expected.
Title:  
Title:  And thus, through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of
Title:  Queequeg, the deliverance, or rather, delivery of Tashtego, was
Title:  successfully accomplished, in the teeth, too, of the most untoward
Title:  and apparently hopeless impediments; which is a lesson by no means to
Title:  be forgotten.  Midwifery should be taught in the same course with
Title:  fencing and boxing, riding and rowing.
Title:  
Title:  I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header's will be sure to
Title:  seem incredible to some landsmen, though they themselves may have
Title:  either seen or heard of some one's falling into a cistern ashore; an
Title:  accident which not seldom happens, and with much less reason too than
Title:  the Indian's, considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of
Title:  the Sperm Whale's well.
Title:  
Title:  But, peradventure, it may be sagaciously urged, how is this?  We
Title:  thought the tissued, infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale, was the
Title:  lightest and most corky part about him; and yet thou makest it sink
Title:  in an element of a far greater specific gravity than itself.  We have
Title:  thee there.  Not at all, but I have ye; for at the time poor Tash
Title:  fell in, the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents,
Title:  leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well--a double
Title:  welded, hammered substance, as I have before said, much heavier than
Title:  the sea water, and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost.  But
Title:  the tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the present
Title:  instance materially counteracted by the other parts of the head
Title:  remaining undetached from it, so that it sank very slowly and
Title:  deliberately indeed, affording Queequeg a fair chance for performing
Title:  his agile obstetrics on the run, as you may say.  Yes, it was a
Title:  running delivery, so it was.
Title:  
Title:  Now, had Tashtego perished in that head, it had been a very precious
Title:  perishing; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrant
Title:  spermaceti; coffined, hearsed, and tombed in the secret inner chamber
Title:  and sanctum sanctorum of the whale.  Only one sweeter end can readily
Title:  be recalled--the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter, who seeking
Title:  honey in the crotch of a hollow tree, found such exceeding store of
Title:  it, that leaning too far over, it sucked him in, so that he died
Title:  embalmed.  How many, think ye, have likewise fallen into Plato's
Title:  honey head, and sweetly perished there?
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 79
Title:  
Title:  The Prairie.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  To scan the lines of his face, or feel the bumps on the head of this
Title:  Leviathan; this is a thing which no Physiognomist or Phrenologist has
Title:  as yet undertaken.  Such an enterprise would seem almost as hopeful
Title:  as for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the Rock of
Title:  Gibraltar, or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated the
Title:  Dome of the Pantheon.  Still, in that famous work of his, Lavater
Title:  not only treats of the various faces of men, but also attentively
Title:  studies the faces of horses, birds, serpents, and fish; and dwells in
Title:  detail upon the modifications of expression discernible therein.  Nor
Title:  have Gall and his disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints
Title:  touching the phrenological characteristics of other beings than man.
Title:  Therefore, though I am but ill qualified for a pioneer, in the
Title:  application of these two semi-sciences to the whale, I will do my
Title:  endeavor.  I try all things; I achieve what I can.
Title:  
Title:  Physiognomically regarded, the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature.
Title:  He has no proper nose.  And since the nose is the central and most
Title:  conspicuous of the features; and since it perhaps most modifies and
Title:  finally controls their combined expression; hence it would seem that
Title:  its entire absence, as an external appendage, must very largely
Title:  affect the countenance of the whale.  For as in landscape gardening,
Title:  a spire, cupola, monument, or tower of some sort, is deemed almost
Title:  indispensable to the completion of the scene; so no face can be
Title:  physiognomically in keeping without the elevated open-work belfry of
Title:  the nose.  Dash the nose from Phidias's marble Jove, and what a sorry
Title:  remainder!  Nevertheless, Leviathan is of so mighty a magnitude, all
Title:  his proportions are so stately, that the same deficiency which in the
Title:  sculptured Jove were hideous, in him is no blemish at all.  Nay, it
Title:  is an added grandeur.  A nose to the whale would have been
Title:  impertinent.  As on your physiognomical voyage you sail round his
Title:  vast head in your jolly-boat, your noble conceptions of him are never
Title:  insulted by the reflection that he has a nose to be pulled.  A
Title:  pestilent conceit, which so often will insist upon obtruding even
Title:  when beholding the mightiest royal beadle on his throne.
Title:  
Title:  In some particulars, perhaps the most imposing physiognomical view
Title:  to be had of the Sperm Whale, is that of the full front of his head.
Title:  This aspect is sublime.
Title:  
Title:  In thought, a fine human brow is like the East when troubled with
Title:  the morning.  In the repose of the pasture, the curled brow of the
Title:  bull has a touch of the grand in it.  Pushing heavy cannon up
Title:  mountain defiles, the elephant's brow is majestic.  Human or animal,
Title:  the mystical brow is as that great golden seal affixed by the German
Title:  Emperors to their decrees.  It signifies--"God: done this day by my
Title:  hand."  But in most creatures, nay in man himself, very often the
Title:  brow is but a mere strip of alpine land lying along the snow line.
Title:  Few are the foreheads which like Shakespeare's or Melancthon's rise
Title:  so high, and descend so low, that the eyes themselves seem clear,
Title:  eternal, tideless mountain lakes; and all above them in the forehead's
Title:  wrinkles, you seem to track the antlered thoughts descending there to
Title:  drink, as the Highland hunters track the snow prints of the deer.
Title:  But in the great Sperm Whale, this high and mighty god-like dignity
Title:  inherent in the brow is so immensely amplified, that gazing on it, in
Title:  that full front view, you feel the Deity and the dread powers more
Title:  forcibly than in beholding any other object in living nature.  For
Title:  you see no one point precisely; not one distinct feature is revealed;
Title:  no nose, eyes, ears, or mouth; no face; he has none, proper; nothing
Title:  but that one broad firmament of a forehead, pleated with riddles;
Title:  dumbly lowering with the doom of boats, and ships, and men.  Nor, in
Title:  profile, does this wondrous brow diminish; though that way viewed its
Title:  grandeur does not domineer upon you so.  In profile, you plainly
Title:  perceive that horizontal, semi-crescentic depression in the
Title:  forehead's middle, which, in man, is Lavater's mark of genius.
Title:  
Title:  But how?  Genius in the Sperm Whale?  Has the Sperm Whale ever
Title:  written a book, spoken a speech?  No, his great genius is declared in
Title:  his doing nothing particular to prove it.  It is moreover declared in
Title:  his pyramidical silence.  And this reminds me that had the great
Title:  Sperm Whale been known to the young Orient World, he would have been
Title:  deified by their child-magian thoughts.  They deified the crocodile
Title:  of the Nile, because the crocodile is tongueless; and the Sperm Whale
Title:  has no tongue, or at least it is so exceedingly small, as to be
Title:  incapable of protrusion.  If hereafter any highly cultured, poetical
Title:  nation shall lure back to their birth-right, the merry May-day gods
Title:  of old; and livingly enthrone them again in the now egotistical sky;
Title:  in the now unhaunted hill; then be sure, exalted to Jove's high seat,
Title:  the great Sperm Whale shall lord it.
Title:  
Title:  Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics.  But there
Title:  is no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every man's and every
Title:  being's face.  Physiognomy, like every other human science, is but a
Title:  passing fable.  If then, Sir William Jones, who read in thirty
Title:  languages, could not read the simplest peasant's face in its
Title:  profounder and more subtle meanings, how may unlettered Ishmael hope
Title:  to read the awful Chaldee of the Sperm Whale's brow?  I but put that
Title:  brow before you.  Read it if you can.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 80
Title:  
Title:  The Nut.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a Sphinx, to the phrenologist
Title:  his brain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible to
Title:  square.
Title:  
Title:  In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty
Title:  feet in length.  Unhinge the lower jaw, and the side view of this
Title:  skull is as the side of a moderately inclined plane resting
Title:  throughout on a level base.  But in life--as we have elsewhere
Title:  seen--this inclined plane is angularly filled up, and almost squared
Title:  by the enormous superincumbent mass of the junk and sperm.  At the
Title:  high end the skull forms a crater to bed that part of the mass; while
Title:  under the long floor of this crater--in another cavity seldom
Title:  exceeding ten inches in length and as many in depth--reposes the
Title:  mere handful of this monster's brain.  The brain is at least twenty
Title:  feet from his apparent forehead in life; it is hidden away behind its
Title:  vast outworks, like the innermost citadel within the amplified
Title:  fortifications of Quebec.  So like a choice casket is it secreted in
Title:  him, that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily deny that the
Title:  Sperm Whale has any other brain than that palpable semblance of one
Title:  formed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine.  Lying in strange
Title:  folds, courses, and convolutions, to their apprehensions, it seems
Title:  more in keeping with the idea of his general might to regard that
Title:  mystic part of him as the seat of his intelligence.
Title:  
Title:  It is plain, then, that phrenologically the head of this Leviathan,
Title:  in the creature's living intact state, is an entire delusion.  As for
Title:  his true brain, you can then see no indications of it, nor feel any.
Title:  The whale, like all things that are mighty, wears a false brow to the
Title:  common world.
Title:  
Title:  If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear view
Title:  of its rear end, which is the high end, you will be struck by its
Title:  resemblance to the human skull, beheld in the same situation, and
Title:  from the same point of view.  Indeed, place this reversed skull
Title:  (scaled down to the human magnitude) among a plate of men's skulls,
Title:  and you would involuntarily confound it with them; and remarking the
Title:  depressions on one part of its summit, in phrenological phrase you
Title:  would say--This man had no self-esteem, and no veneration.  And by
Title:  those negations, considered along with the affirmative fact of his
Title:  prodigious bulk and power, you can best form to yourself the truest,
Title:  though not the most exhilarating conception of what the most exalted
Title:  potency is.
Title:  
Title:  But if from the comparative dimensions of the whale's proper brain,
Title:  you deem it incapable of being adequately charted, then I have
Title:  another idea for you.  If you attentively regard almost any
Title:  quadruped's spine, you will be struck with the resemblance of its
Title:  vertebrae to a strung necklace of dwarfed skulls, all bearing
Title:  rudimental resemblance to the skull proper.  It is a German conceit,
Title:  that the vertebrae are absolutely undeveloped skulls.  But the
Title:  curious external resemblance, I take it the Germans were not the
Title:  first men to perceive.  A foreign friend once pointed it out to me,
Title:  in the skeleton of a foe he had slain, and with the vertebrae of
Title:  which he was inlaying, in a sort of basso-relievo, the beaked prow
Title:  of his canoe.  Now, I consider that the phrenologists have omitted an
Title:  important thing in not pushing their investigations from the
Title:  cerebellum through the spinal canal.  For I believe that much of a
Title:  man's character will be found betokened in his backbone.  I would
Title:  rather feel your spine than your skull, whoever you are.  A thin
Title:  joist of a spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul.  I rejoice
Title:  in my spine, as in the firm audacious staff of that flag which I
Title:  fling half out to the world.
Title:  
Title:  Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the Sperm Whale.  His
Title:  cranial cavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra; and in
Title:  that vertebra the bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inches
Title:  across, being eight in height, and of a triangular figure with the
Title:  base downwards.  As it passes through the remaining vertebrae the
Title:  canal tapers in size, but for a considerable distance remains of
Title:  large capacity.  Now, of course, this canal is filled with much the
Title:  same strangely fibrous substance--the spinal cord--as the brain; and
Title:  directly communicates with the brain.  And what is still more, for
Title:  many feet after emerging from the brain's cavity, the spinal cord
Title:  remains of an undecreasing girth, almost equal to that of the brain.
Title:  Under all these circumstances, would it be unreasonable to survey and
Title:  map out the whale's spine phrenologically?  For, viewed in this
Title:  light, the wonderful comparative smallness of his brain proper is
Title:  more than compensated by the wonderful comparative magnitude of his
Title:  spinal cord.
Title:  
Title:  But leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists, I
Title:  would merely assume the spinal theory for a moment, in reference to
Title:  the Sperm Whale's hump.  This august hump, if I mistake not, rises
Title:  over one of the larger vertebrae, and is, therefore, in some sort,
Title:  the outer convex mould of it.  From its relative situation then, I
Title:  should call this high hump the organ of firmness or indomitableness
Title:  in the Sperm Whale.  And that the great monster is indomitable, you
Title:  will yet have reason to know.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 81
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod Meets The Virgin.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The predestinated day arrived, and we duly met the ship Jungfrau,
Title:  Derick De Deer, master, of Bremen.
Title:  
Title:  At one time the greatest whaling people in the world, the Dutch and
Title:  Germans are now among the least; but here and there at very wide
Title:  intervals of latitude and longitude, you still occasionally meet with
Title:  their flag in the Pacific.
Title:  
Title:  For some reason, the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects.
Title:  While yet some distance from the Pequod, she rounded to, and
Title:  dropping a boat, her captain was impelled towards us, impatiently
Title:  standing in the bows instead of the stern.
Title:  
Title:  "What has he in his hand there?" cried Starbuck, pointing to
Title:  something wavingly held by the German.  "Impossible!--a lamp-feeder!"
Title:  
Title:  "Not that," said Stubb, "no, no, it's a coffee-pot, Mr. Starbuck;
Title:  he's coming off to make us our coffee, is the Yarman; don't you see
Title:  that big tin can there alongside of him?--that's his boiling water.
Title:  Oh! he's all right, is the Yarman."
Title:  
Title:  "Go along with you," cried Flask, "it's a lamp-feeder and an oil-can.
Title:  He's out of oil, and has come a-begging."
Title:  
Title:  However curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing oil on
Title:  the whale-ground, and however much it may invertedly contradict the
Title:  old proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle, yet sometimes such a
Title:  thing really happens; and in the present case Captain Derick De Deer
Title:  did indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as Flask did declare.
Title:  
Title:  As he mounted the deck, Ahab abruptly accosted him, without at all
Title:  heeding what he had in his hand; but in his broken lingo, the German
Title:  soon evinced his complete ignorance of the White Whale; immediately
Title:  turning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can, with some
Title:  remarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at night in
Title:  profound darkness--his last drop of Bremen oil being gone, and not a
Title:  single flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency; concluding
Title:  by hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery is
Title:  technically called a CLEAN one (that is, an empty one), well
Title:  deserving the name of Jungfrau or the Virgin.
Title:  
Title:  His necessities supplied, Derick departed; but he had not gained his
Title:  ship's side, when whales were almost simultaneously raised from the
Title:  mast-heads of both vessels; and so eager for the chase was Derick,
Title:  that without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard, he
Title:  slewed round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders.
Title:  
Title:  Now, the game having risen to leeward, he and the other three German
Title:  boats that soon followed him, had considerably the start of the
Title:  Pequod's keels.  There were eight whales, an average pod.  Aware of
Title:  their danger, they were going all abreast with great speed straight
Title:  before the wind, rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans of
Title:  horses in harness.  They left a great, wide wake, as though
Title:  continually unrolling a great wide parchment upon the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Full in this rapid wake, and many fathoms in the rear, swam a huge,
Title:  humped old bull, which by his comparatively slow progress, as well as
Title:  by the unusual yellowish incrustations overgrowing him, seemed
Title:  afflicted with the jaundice, or some other infirmity.  Whether this
Title:  whale belonged to the pod in advance, seemed questionable; for it is
Title:  not customary for such venerable leviathans to be at all social.
Title:  Nevertheless, he stuck to their wake, though indeed their back water
Title:  must have retarded him, because the white-bone or swell at his broad
Title:  muzzle was a dashed one, like the swell formed when two hostile
Title:  currents meet.  His spout was short, slow, and laborious; coming
Title:  forth with a choking sort of gush, and spending itself in torn
Title:  shreds, followed by strange subterranean commotions in him, which
Title:  seemed to have egress at his other buried extremity, causing the
Title:  waters behind him to upbubble.
Title:  
Title:  "Who's got some paregoric?" said Stubb, "he has the stomach-ache, I'm
Title:  afraid.  Lord, think of having half an acre of stomach-ache!  Adverse
Title:  winds are holding mad Christmas in him, boys.  It's the first foul
Title:  wind I ever knew to blow from astern; but look, did ever whale yaw
Title:  so before? it must be, he's lost his tiller."
Title:  
Title:  As an overladen Indiaman bearing down the Hindostan coast with a deck
Title:  load of frightened horses, careens, buries, rolls, and wallows on her
Title:  way; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk, and now and then
Title:  partly turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends, expose the cause of his
Title:  devious wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin.  Whether he
Title:  had lost that fin in battle, or had been born without it, it were
Title:  hard to say.
Title:  
Title:  "Only wait a bit, old chap, and I'll give ye a sling for that wounded
Title:  arm," cried cruel Flask, pointing to the whale-line near him.
Title:  
Title:  "Mind he don't sling thee with it," cried Starbuck.  "Give way, or
Title:  the German will have him."
Title:  
Title:  With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for this
Title:  one fish, because not only was he the largest, and therefore the most
Title:  valuable whale, but he was nearest to them, and the other whales were
Title:  going with such great velocity, moreover, as almost to defy pursuit
Title:  for the time.  At this juncture the Pequod's keels had shot by the
Title:  three German boats last lowered; but from the great start he had had,
Title:  Derick's boat still led the chase, though every moment neared by his
Title:  foreign rivals.  The only thing they feared, was, that from being
Title:  already so nigh to his mark, he would be enabled to dart his iron
Title:  before they could completely overtake and pass him.  As for Derick,
Title:  he seemed quite confident that this would be the case, and
Title:  occasionally with a deriding gesture shook his lamp-feeder at the
Title:  other boats.
Title:  
Title:  "The ungracious and ungrateful dog!" cried Starbuck; "he mocks and
Title:  dares me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutes
Title:  ago!"--then in his old intense whisper--"Give way, greyhounds!  Dog
Title:  to it!"
Title:  
Title:  "I tell ye what it is, men"--cried Stubb to his crew--"it's against
Title:  my religion to get mad; but I'd like to eat that villainous
Title:  Yarman--Pull--won't ye?  Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye?  Do
Title:  ye love brandy?  A hogshead of brandy, then, to the best man.  Come,
Title:  why don't some of ye burst a blood-vessel?  Who's that been dropping
Title:  an anchor overboard--we don't budge an inch--we're becalmed.  Halloo,
Title:  here's grass growing in the boat's bottom--and by the Lord, the mast
Title:  there's budding.  This won't do, boys.  Look at that Yarman!  The
Title:  short and long of it is, men, will ye spit fire or not?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh! see the suds he makes!" cried Flask, dancing up and down--"What
Title:  a hump--Oh, DO pile on the beef--lays like a log!  Oh! my lads, DO
Title:  spring--slap-jacks and quahogs for supper, you know, my lads--baked
Title:  clams and muffins--oh, DO, DO, spring,--he's a hundred barreller--don't
Title:  lose him now--don't oh, DON'T!--see that Yarman--Oh,
Title:  won't ye pull for your duff, my lads--such a sog! such a sogger!
Title:  Don't ye love sperm?  There goes three thousand dollars, men!--a
Title:  bank!--a whole bank!  The bank of England!--Oh, DO, DO, DO!--What's
Title:  that Yarman about now?"
Title:  
Title:  At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder at
Title:  the advancing boats, and also his oil-can; perhaps with the double
Title:  view of retarding his rivals' way, and at the same time economically
Title:  accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss.
Title:  
Title:  "The unmannerly Dutch dogger!" cried Stubb.  "Pull now, men, like
Title:  fifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils.  What
Title:  d'ye say, Tashtego; are you the man to snap your spine in
Title:  two-and-twenty pieces for the honour of old Gayhead?  What d'ye say?"
Title:  
Title:  "I say, pull like god-dam,"--cried the Indian.
Title:  
Title:  Fiercely, but evenly incited by the taunts of the German, the
Title:  Pequod's three boats now began ranging almost abreast; and, so
Title:  disposed, momentarily neared him.  In that fine, loose, chivalrous
Title:  attitude of the headsman when drawing near to his prey, the three
Title:  mates stood up proudly, occasionally backing the after oarsman with
Title:  an exhilarating cry of, "There she slides, now!  Hurrah for the
Title:  white-ash breeze!  Down with the Yarman!  Sail over him!"
Title:  
Title:  But so decided an original start had Derick had, that spite of all
Title:  their gallantry, he would have proved the victor in this race, had
Title:  not a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught
Title:  the blade of his midship oarsman.  While this clumsy lubber was
Title:  striving to free his white-ash, and while, in consequence, Derick's
Title:  boat was nigh to capsizing, and he thundering away at his men in a
Title:  mighty rage;--that was a good time for Starbuck, Stubb, and Flask.
Title:  With a shout, they took a mortal start forwards, and slantingly
Title:  ranged up on the German's quarter.  An instant more, and all four
Title:  boats were diagonically in the whale's immediate wake, while
Title:  stretching from them, on both sides, was the foaming swell that he
Title:  made.
Title:  
Title:  It was a terrific, most pitiable, and maddening sight.  The whale was
Title:  now going head out, and sending his spout before him in a continual
Title:  tormented jet; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of
Title:  fright.  Now to this hand, now to that, he yawed in his faltering
Title:  flight, and still at every billow that he broke, he spasmodically
Title:  sank in the sea, or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating
Title:  fin.  So have I seen a bird with clipped wing making affrighted
Title:  broken circles in the air, vainly striving to escape the piratical
Title:  hawks.  But the bird has a voice, and with plaintive cries will make
Title:  known her fear; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea, was
Title:  chained up and enchanted in him; he had no voice, save that choking
Title:  respiration through his spiracle, and this made the sight of him
Title:  unspeakably pitiable; while still, in his amazing bulk, portcullis
Title:  jaw, and omnipotent tail, there was enough to appal the stoutest man
Title:  who so pitied.
Title:  
Title:  Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod's
Title:  boats the advantage, and rather than be thus foiled of his game,
Title:  Derick chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually
Title:  long dart, ere the last chance would for ever escape.
Title:  
Title:  But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke, than all
Title:  three tigers--Queequeg, Tashtego, Daggoo--instinctively sprang to
Title:  their feet, and standing in a diagonal row, simultaneously pointed
Title:  their barbs; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer, their
Title:  three Nantucket irons entered the whale.  Blinding vapours of foam and
Title:  white-fire!  The three boats, in the first fury of the whale's
Title:  headlong rush, bumped the German's aside with such force, that both
Title:  Derick and his baffled harpooneer were spilled out, and sailed over
Title:  by the three flying keels.
Title:  
Title:  "Don't be afraid, my butter-boxes," cried Stubb, casting a passing
Title:  glance upon them as he shot by; "ye'll be picked up presently--all
Title:  right--I saw some sharks astern--St. Bernard's dogs, you
Title:  know--relieve distressed travellers.  Hurrah! this is the way to sail
Title:  now.  Every keel a sunbeam!  Hurrah!--Here we go like three tin
Title:  kettles at the tail of a mad cougar!  This puts me in mind of
Title:  fastening to an elephant in a tilbury on a plain--makes the
Title:  wheel-spokes fly, boys, when you fasten to him that way; and there's
Title:  danger of being pitched out too, when you strike a hill.  Hurrah!
Title:  this is the way a fellow feels when he's going to Davy Jones--all a
Title:  rush down an endless inclined plane!  Hurrah! this whale carries the
Title:  everlasting mail!"
Title:  
Title:  But the monster's run was a brief one.  Giving a sudden gasp, he
Title:  tumultuously sounded.  With a grating rush, the three lines flew
Title:  round the loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in
Title:  them; while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid sounding
Title:  would soon exhaust the lines, that using all their dexterous might,
Title:  they caught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on; till at
Title:  last--owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined chocks of
Title:  the boats, whence the three ropes went straight down into the
Title:  blue--the gunwales of the bows were almost even with the water, while
Title:  the three sterns tilted high in the air.  And the whale soon ceasing
Title:  to sound, for some time they remained in that attitude, fearful of
Title:  expending more line, though the position was a little ticklish.  But
Title:  though boats have been taken down and lost in this way, yet it is
Title:  this "holding on," as it is called; this hooking up by the sharp
Title:  barbs of his live flesh from the back; this it is that often torments
Title:  the Leviathan into soon rising again to meet the sharp lance of his
Title:  foes.  Yet not to speak of the peril of the thing, it is to be
Title:  doubted whether this course is always the best; for it is but
Title:  reasonable to presume, that the longer the stricken whale stays under
Title:  water, the more he is exhausted.  Because, owing to the enormous
Title:  surface of him--in a full grown sperm whale something less than 2000
Title:  square feet--the pressure of the water is immense.  We all know what
Title:  an astonishing atmospheric weight we ourselves stand up under; even
Title:  here, above-ground, in the air; how vast, then, the burden of a
Title:  whale, bearing on his back a column of two hundred fathoms of ocean!
Title:  It must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres.  One whaleman
Title:  has estimated it at the weight of twenty line-of-battle ships, with
Title:  all their guns, and stores, and men on board.
Title:  
Title:  As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea, gazing down
Title:  into its eternal blue noon; and as not a single groan or cry of any
Title:  sort, nay, not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its
Title:  depths; what landsman would have thought, that beneath all that
Title:  silence and placidity, the utmost monster of the seas was writhing
Title:  and wrenching in agony!  Not eight inches of perpendicular rope were
Title:  visible at the bows.  Seems it credible that by three such thin
Title:  threads the great Leviathan was suspended like the big weight to an
Title:  eight day clock.  Suspended? and to what?  To three bits of board.
Title:  Is this the creature of whom it was once so triumphantly said--"Canst
Title:  thou fill his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish-spears?
Title:  The sword of him that layeth at him cannot hold, the spear, the dart,
Title:  nor the habergeon: he esteemeth iron as straw; the arrow cannot make
Title:  him flee; darts are counted as stubble; he laugheth at the shaking of
Title:  a spear!"  This the creature? this he?  Oh! that unfulfilments should
Title:  follow the prophets.  For with the strength of a thousand thighs in
Title:  his tail, Leviathan had run his head under the mountains of the sea,
Title:  to hide him from the Pequod's fish-spears!
Title:  
Title:  In that sloping afternoon sunlight, the shadows that the three boats
Title:  sent down beneath the surface, must have been long enough and broad
Title:  enough to shade half Xerxes' army.  Who can tell how appalling to the
Title:  wounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over his
Title:  head!
Title:  
Title:  "Stand by, men; he stirs," cried Starbuck, as the three lines
Title:  suddenly vibrated in the water, distinctly conducting upwards to
Title:  them, as by magnetic wires, the life and death throbs of the whale,
Title:  so that every oarsman felt them in his seat.  The next moment,
Title:  relieved in great part from the downward strain at the bows, the
Title:  boats gave a sudden bounce upwards, as a small icefield will, when a
Title:  dense herd of white bears are scared from it into the sea.
Title:  
Title:  "Haul in!  Haul in!" cried Starbuck again; "he's rising."
Title:  
Title:  The lines, of which, hardly an instant before, not one hand's breadth
Title:  could have been gained, were now in long quick coils flung back all
Title:  dripping into the boats, and soon the whale broke water within two
Title:  ship's lengths of the hunters.
Title:  
Title:  His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion.  In most land
Title:  animals there are certain valves or flood-gates in many of their
Title:  veins, whereby when wounded, the blood is in some degree at least
Title:  instantly shut off in certain directions.  Not so with the whale; one
Title:  of whose peculiarities it is to have an entire non-valvular structure
Title:  of the blood-vessels, so that when pierced even by so small a point
Title:  as a harpoon, a deadly drain is at once begun upon his whole
Title:  arterial system; and when this is heightened by the extraordinary
Title:  pressure of water at a great distance below the surface, his life may
Title:  be said to pour from him in incessant streams.  Yet so vast is the
Title:  quantity of blood in him, and so distant and numerous its interior
Title:  fountains, that he will keep thus bleeding and bleeding for a
Title:  considerable period; even as in a drought a river will flow, whose
Title:  source is in the well-springs of far-off and undiscernible hills.
Title:  Even now, when the boats pulled upon this whale, and perilously drew
Title:  over his swaying flukes, and the lances were darted into him, they
Title:  were followed by steady jets from the new made wound, which kept
Title:  continually playing, while the natural spout-hole in his head was
Title:  only at intervals, however rapid, sending its affrighted moisture
Title:  into the air.  From this last vent no blood yet came, because no
Title:  vital part of him had thus far been struck.  His life, as they
Title:  significantly call it, was untouched.
Title:  
Title:  As the boats now more closely surrounded him, the whole upper part of
Title:  his form, with much of it that is ordinarily submerged, was plainly
Title:  revealed.  His eyes, or rather the places where his eyes had been,
Title:  were beheld.  As strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes of
Title:  the noblest oaks when prostrate, so from the points which the whale's
Title:  eyes had once occupied, now protruded blind bulbs, horribly pitiable
Title:  to see.  But pity there was none.  For all his old age, and his one
Title:  arm, and his blind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered, in
Title:  order to light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men, and
Title:  also to illuminate the solemn churches that preach unconditional
Title:  inoffensiveness by all to all.  Still rolling in his blood, at last
Title:  he partially disclosed a strangely discoloured bunch or protuberance,
Title:  the size of a bushel, low down on the flank.
Title:  
Title:  "A nice spot," cried Flask; "just let me prick him there once."
Title:  
Title:  "Avast!" cried Starbuck, "there's no need of that!"
Title:  
Title:  But humane Starbuck was too late.  At the instant of the dart an
Title:  ulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound, and goaded by it into more
Title:  than sufferable anguish, the whale now spouting thick blood, with
Title:  swift fury blindly darted at the craft, bespattering them and their
Title:  glorying crews all over with showers of gore, capsizing Flask's boat
Title:  and marring the bows.  It was his death stroke.  For, by this time,
Title:  so spent was he by loss of blood, that he helplessly rolled away from
Title:  the wreck he had made; lay panting on his side, impotently flapped
Title:  with his stumped fin, then over and over slowly revolved like a
Title:  waning world; turned up the white secrets of his belly; lay like a
Title:  log, and died.  It was most piteous, that last expiring spout.  As
Title:  when by unseen hands the water is gradually drawn off from some
Title:  mighty fountain, and with half-stifled melancholy gurglings the
Title:  spray-column lowers and lowers to the ground--so the last long dying
Title:  spout of the whale.
Title:  
Title:  Soon, while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship, the body
Title:  showed symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled.
Title:  Immediately, by Starbuck's orders, lines were secured to it at
Title:  different points, so that ere long every boat was a buoy; the sunken
Title:  whale being suspended a few inches beneath them by the cords.  By
Title:  very heedful management, when the ship drew nigh, the whale was
Title:  transferred to her side, and was strongly secured there by the
Title:  stiffest fluke-chains, for it was plain that unless artificially
Title:  upheld, the body would at once sink to the bottom.
Title:  
Title:  It so chanced that almost upon first cutting into him with the
Title:  spade, the entire length of a corroded harpoon was found imbedded in
Title:  his flesh, on the lower part of the bunch before described.  But as
Title:  the stumps of harpoons are frequently found in the dead bodies of
Title:  captured whales, with the flesh perfectly healed around them, and no
Title:  prominence of any kind to denote their place; therefore, there must
Title:  needs have been some other unknown reason in the present case fully
Title:  to account for the ulceration alluded to.  But still more curious was
Title:  the fact of a lance-head of stone being found in him, not far from
Title:  the buried iron, the flesh perfectly firm about it.  Who had darted
Title:  that stone lance?  And when?  It might have been darted by some Nor'
Title:  West Indian long before America was discovered.
Title:  
Title:  What other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrous
Title:  cabinet there is no telling.  But a sudden stop was put to further
Title:  discoveries, by the ship's being unprecedentedly dragged over
Title:  sideways to the sea, owing to the body's immensely increasing
Title:  tendency to sink.  However, Starbuck, who had the ordering of
Title:  affairs, hung on to it to the last; hung on to it so resolutely,
Title:  indeed, that when at length the ship would have been capsized, if
Title:  still persisting in locking arms with the body; then, when the
Title:  command was given to break clear from it, such was the immovable
Title:  strain upon the timber-heads to which the fluke-chains and cables
Title:  were fastened, that it was impossible to cast them off.  Meantime
Title:  everything in the Pequod was aslant.  To cross to the other side of
Title:  the deck was like walking up the steep gabled roof of a house.  The
Title:  ship groaned and gasped.  Many of the ivory inlayings of her bulwarks
Title:  and cabins were started from their places, by the unnatural
Title:  dislocation.  In vain handspikes and crows were brought to bear upon
Title:  the immovable fluke-chains, to pry them adrift from the timberheads;
Title:  and so low had the whale now settled that the submerged ends could
Title:  not be at all approached, while every moment whole tons of
Title:  ponderosity seemed added to the sinking bulk, and the ship seemed on
Title:  the point of going over.
Title:  
Title:  "Hold on, hold on, won't ye?" cried Stubb to the body, "don't be in
Title:  such a devil of a hurry to sink!  By thunder, men, we must do
Title:  something or go for it.  No use prying there; avast, I say with your
Title:  handspikes, and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife, and
Title:  cut the big chains."
Title:  
Title:  "Knife?  Aye, aye," cried Queequeg, and seizing the carpenter's heavy
Title:  hatchet, he leaned out of a porthole, and steel to iron, began
Title:  slashing at the largest fluke-chains.  But a few strokes, full of
Title:  sparks, were given, when the exceeding strain effected the rest.
Title:  With a terrific snap, every fastening went adrift; the ship righted,
Title:  the carcase sank.
Title:  
Title:  Now, this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed Sperm
Title:  Whale is a very curious thing; nor has any fisherman yet adequately
Title:  accounted for it.  Usually the dead Sperm Whale floats with great
Title:  buoyancy, with its side or belly considerably elevated above the
Title:  surface.  If the only whales that thus sank were old, meagre, and
Title:  broken-hearted creatures, their pads of lard diminished and all their
Title:  bones heavy and rheumatic; then you might with some reason assert
Title:  that this sinking is caused by an uncommon specific gravity in the
Title:  fish so sinking, consequent upon this absence of buoyant matter in
Title:  him.  But it is not so.  For young whales, in the highest health, and
Title:  swelling with noble aspirations, prematurely cut off in the warm
Title:  flush and May of life, with all their panting lard about them; even
Title:  these brawny, buoyant heroes do sometimes sink.
Title:  
Title:  Be it said, however, that the Sperm Whale is far less liable to this
Title:  accident than any other species.  Where one of that sort go down,
Title:  twenty Right Whales do.  This difference in the species is no doubt
Title:  imputable in no small degree to the greater quantity of bone in the
Title:  Right Whale; his Venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more than a
Title:  ton; from this incumbrance the Sperm Whale is wholly free.  But there
Title:  are instances where, after the lapse of many hours or several days,
Title:  the sunken whale again rises, more buoyant than in life.  But the
Title:  reason of this is obvious.  Gases are generated in him; he swells to
Title:  a prodigious magnitude; becomes a sort of animal balloon.  A
Title:  line-of-battle ship could hardly keep him under then.  In the Shore
Title:  Whaling, on soundings, among the Bays of New Zealand, when a Right
Title:  Whale gives token of sinking, they fasten buoys to him, with plenty
Title:  of rope; so that when the body has gone down, they know where to look
Title:  for it when it shall have ascended again.
Title:  
Title:  It was not long after the sinking of the body that a cry was heard
Title:  from the Pequod's mast-heads, announcing that the Jungfrau was again
Title:  lowering her boats; though the only spout in sight was that of a
Title:  Fin-Back, belonging to the species of uncapturable whales, because of
Title:  its incredible power of swimming.  Nevertheless, the Fin-Back's spout
Title:  is so similar to the Sperm Whale's, that by unskilful fishermen it is
Title:  often mistaken for it.  And consequently Derick and all his host were
Title:  now in valiant chase of this unnearable brute.  The Virgin crowding
Title:  all sail, made after her four young keels, and thus they all
Title:  disappeared far to leeward, still in bold, hopeful chase.
Title:  
Title:  Oh! many are the Fin-Backs, and many are the Dericks, my friend.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 82
Title:  
Title:  The Honour and Glory of Whaling.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  There are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is the
Title:  true method.
Title:  
Title:  The more I dive into this matter of whaling, and push my researches
Title:  up to the very spring-head of it so much the more am I impressed with
Title:  its great honourableness and antiquity; and especially when I find so
Title:  many great demi-gods and heroes, prophets of all sorts, who one way
Title:  or other have shed distinction upon it, I am transported with the
Title:  reflection that I myself belong, though but subordinately, to so
Title:  emblazoned a fraternity.
Title:  
Title:  The gallant Perseus, a son of Jupiter, was the first whaleman; and to
Title:  the eternal honour of our calling be it said, that the first whale
Title:  attacked by our brotherhood was not killed with any sordid intent.
Title:  Those were the knightly days of our profession, when we only bore
Title:  arms to succor the distressed, and not to fill men's lamp-feeders.
Title:  Every one knows the fine story of Perseus and Andromeda; how the
Title:  lovely Andromeda, the daughter of a king, was tied to a rock on the
Title:  sea-coast, and as Leviathan was in the very act of carrying her off,
Title:  Perseus, the prince of whalemen, intrepidly advancing, harpooned the
Title:  monster, and delivered and married the maid.  It was an admirable
Title:  artistic exploit, rarely achieved by the best harpooneers of the
Title:  present day; inasmuch as this Leviathan was slain at the very first
Title:  dart.  And let no man doubt this Arkite story; for in the ancient
Title:  Joppa, now Jaffa, on the Syrian coast, in one of the Pagan temples,
Title:  there stood for many ages the vast skeleton of a whale, which the
Title:  city's legends and all the inhabitants asserted to be the identical
Title:  bones of the monster that Perseus slew.  When the Romans took Joppa,
Title:  the same skeleton was carried to Italy in triumph.  What seems most
Title:  singular and suggestively important in this story, is this: it was
Title:  from Joppa that Jonah set sail.
Title:  
Title:  Akin to the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda--indeed, by some
Title:  supposed to be indirectly derived from it--is that famous story of
Title:  St. George and the Dragon; which dragon I maintain to have been a
Title:  whale; for in many old chronicles whales and dragons are strangely
Title:  jumbled together, and often stand for each other.  "Thou art as a
Title:  lion of the waters, and as a dragon of the sea," saith Ezekiel;
Title:  hereby, plainly meaning a whale; in truth, some versions of the Bible
Title:  use that word itself.  Besides, it would much subtract from the glory
Title:  of the exploit had St. George but encountered a crawling reptile of
Title:  the land, instead of doing battle with the great monster of the deep.
Title:  Any man may kill a snake, but only a Perseus, a St. George, a
Title:  Coffin, have the heart in them to march boldly up to a whale.
Title:  
Title:  Let not the modern paintings of this scene mislead us; for though the
Title:  creature encountered by that valiant whaleman of old is vaguely
Title:  represented of a griffin-like shape, and though the battle is
Title:  depicted on land and the saint on horseback, yet considering the
Title:  great ignorance of those times, when the true form of the whale was
Title:  unknown to artists; and considering that as in Perseus' case, St.
Title:  George's whale might have crawled up out of the sea on the beach; and
Title:  considering that the animal ridden by St. George might have been only
Title:  a large seal, or sea-horse; bearing all this in mind, it will not
Title:  appear altogether incompatible with the sacred legend and the
Title:  ancientest draughts of the scene, to hold this so-called dragon no
Title:  other than the great Leviathan himself.  In fact, placed before the
Title:  strict and piercing truth, this whole story will fare like that fish,
Title:  flesh, and fowl idol of the Philistines, Dagon by name; who being
Title:  planted before the ark of Israel, his horse's head and both the palms
Title:  of his hands fell off from him, and only the stump or fishy part of
Title:  him remained.  Thus, then, one of our own noble stamp, even a
Title:  whaleman, is the tutelary guardian of England; and by good rights, we
Title:  harpooneers of Nantucket should be enrolled in the most noble order
Title:  of St. George.  And therefore, let not the knights of that honourable
Title:  company (none of whom, I venture to say, have ever had to do with a
Title:  whale like their great patron), let them never eye a Nantucketer with
Title:  disdain, since even in our woollen frocks and tarred trowsers we are
Title:  much better entitled to St. George's decoration than they.
Title:  
Title:  Whether to admit Hercules among us or not, concerning this I long
Title:  remained dubious: for though according to the Greek mythologies, that
Title:  antique Crockett and Kit Carson--that brawny doer of rejoicing good
Title:  deeds, was swallowed down and thrown up by a whale; still, whether
Title:  that strictly makes a whaleman of him, that might be mooted.  It
Title:  nowhere appears that he ever actually harpooned his fish, unless,
Title:  indeed, from the inside.  Nevertheless, he may be deemed a sort of
Title:  involuntary whaleman; at any rate the whale caught him, if he did not
Title:  the whale.  I claim him for one of our clan.
Title:  
Title:  But, by the best contradictory authorities, this Grecian story of
Title:  Hercules and the whale is considered to be derived from the still
Title:  more ancient Hebrew story of Jonah and the whale; and vice versa;
Title:  certainly they are very similar.  If I claim the demigod then, why
Title:  not the prophet?
Title:  
Title:  Nor do heroes, saints, demigods, and prophets alone comprise the
Title:  whole roll of our order.  Our grand master is still to be named; for
Title:  like royal kings of old times, we find the head waters of our
Title:  fraternity in nothing short of the great gods themselves.  That
Title:  wondrous oriental story is now to be rehearsed from the Shaster,
Title:  which gives us the dread Vishnoo, one of the three persons in the
Title:  godhead of the Hindoos; gives us this divine Vishnoo himself for our
Title:  Lord;--Vishnoo, who, by the first of his ten earthly incarnations,
Title:  has for ever set apart and sanctified the whale.  When Brahma, or the
Title:  God of Gods, saith the Shaster, resolved to recreate the world after
Title:  one of its periodical dissolutions, he gave birth to Vishnoo, to
Title:  preside over the work; but the Vedas, or mystical books, whose
Title:  perusal would seem to have been indispensable to Vishnoo before
Title:  beginning the creation, and which therefore must have contained
Title:  something in the shape of practical hints to young architects, these
Title:  Vedas were lying at the bottom of the waters; so Vishnoo became
Title:  incarnate in a whale, and sounding down in him to the uttermost
Title:  depths, rescued the sacred volumes.  Was not this Vishnoo a whaleman,
Title:  then? even as a man who rides a horse is called a horseman?
Title:  
Title:  Perseus, St. George, Hercules, Jonah, and Vishnoo! there's a
Title:  member-roll for you!  What club but the whaleman's can head off like
Title:  that?
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 83
Title:  
Title:  Jonah Historically Regarded.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Reference was made to the historical story of Jonah and the whale in
Title:  the preceding chapter.  Now some Nantucketers rather distrust this
Title:  historical story of Jonah and the whale.  But then there were some
Title:  sceptical Greeks and Romans, who, standing out from the orthodox
Title:  pagans of their times, equally doubted the story of Hercules and the
Title:  whale, and Arion and the dolphin; and yet their doubting those
Title:  traditions did not make those traditions one whit the less facts, for
Title:  all that.
Title:  
Title:  One old Sag-Harbor whaleman's chief reason for questioning the Hebrew
Title:  story was this:--He had one of those quaint old-fashioned Bibles,
Title:  embellished with curious, unscientific plates; one of which
Title:  represented Jonah's whale with two spouts in his head--a peculiarity
Title:  only true with respect to a species of the Leviathan (the Right
Title:  Whale, and the varieties of that order), concerning which the
Title:  fishermen have this saying, "A penny roll would choke him"; his
Title:  swallow is so very small.  But, to this, Bishop Jebb's anticipative
Title:  answer is ready.  It is not necessary, hints the Bishop, that we
Title:  consider Jonah as tombed in the whale's belly, but as temporarily
Title:  lodged in some part of his mouth.  And this seems reasonable enough
Title:  in the good Bishop.  For truly, the Right Whale's mouth would
Title:  accommodate a couple of whist-tables, and comfortably seat all the
Title:  players.  Possibly, too, Jonah might have ensconced himself in a
Title:  hollow tooth; but, on second thoughts, the Right Whale is toothless.
Title:  
Title:  Another reason which Sag-Harbor (he went by that name) urged for his
Title:  want of faith in this matter of the prophet, was something obscurely
Title:  in reference to his incarcerated body and the whale's gastric juices.
Title:  But this objection likewise falls to the ground, because a German
Title:  exegetist supposes that Jonah must have taken refuge in the floating
Title:  body of a DEAD whale--even as the French soldiers in the Russian
Title:  campaign turned their dead horses into tents, and crawled into them.
Title:  Besides, it has been divined by other continental commentators, that
Title:  when Jonah was thrown overboard from the Joppa ship, he straightway
Title:  effected his escape to another vessel near by, some vessel with a
Title:  whale for a figure-head; and, I would add, possibly called "The
Title:  Whale," as some craft are nowadays christened the "Shark," the
Title:  "Gull," the "Eagle."  Nor have there been wanting learned exegetists
Title:  who have opined that the whale mentioned in the book of Jonah merely
Title:  meant a life-preserver--an inflated bag of wind--which the endangered
Title:  prophet swam to, and so was saved from a watery doom.  Poor
Title:  Sag-Harbor, therefore, seems worsted all round.  But he had still
Title:  another reason for his want of faith.  It was this, if I remember
Title:  right: Jonah was swallowed by the whale in the Mediterranean Sea, and
Title:  after three days he was vomited up somewhere within three days'
Title:  journey of Nineveh, a city on the Tigris, very much more than three
Title:  days' journey across from the nearest point of the Mediterranean
Title:  coast.  How is that?
Title:  
Title:  But was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet within
Title:  that short distance of Nineveh?  Yes.  He might have carried him
Title:  round by the way of the Cape of Good Hope.  But not to speak of the
Title:  passage through the whole length of the Mediterranean, and another
Title:  passage up the Persian Gulf and Red Sea, such a supposition would
Title:  involve the complete circumnavigation of all Africa in three days,
Title:  not to speak of the Tigris waters, near the site of Nineveh, being
Title:  too shallow for any whale to swim in.  Besides, this idea of Jonah's
Title:  weathering the Cape of Good Hope at so early a day would wrest the
Title:  honour of the discovery of that great headland from Bartholomew Diaz,
Title:  its reputed discoverer, and so make modern history a liar.
Title:  
Title:  But all these foolish arguments of old Sag-Harbor only evinced his
Title:  foolish pride of reason--a thing still more reprehensible in him,
Title:  seeing that he had but little learning except what he had picked up
Title:  from the sun and the sea.  I say it only shows his foolish, impious
Title:  pride, and abominable, devilish rebellion against the reverend
Title:  clergy.  For by a Portuguese Catholic priest, this very idea of
Title:  Jonah's going to Nineveh via the Cape of Good Hope was advanced as a
Title:  signal magnification of the general miracle.  And so it was.
Title:  Besides, to this day, the highly enlightened Turks devoutly believe
Title:  in the historical story of Jonah.  And some three centuries ago, an
Title:  English traveller in old Harris's Voyages, speaks of a Turkish Mosque
Title:  built in honour of Jonah, in which Mosque was a miraculous lamp that
Title:  burnt without any oil.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 84
Title:  
Title:  Pitchpoling.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  To make them run easily and swiftly, the axles of carriages are
Title:  anointed; and for much the same purpose, some whalers perform an
Title:  analogous operation upon their boat; they grease the bottom.  Nor is
Title:  it to be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm, it may
Title:  possibly be of no contemptible advantage; considering that oil and
Title:  water are hostile; that oil is a sliding thing, and that the object
Title:  in view is to make the boat slide bravely.  Queequeg believed
Title:  strongly in anointing his boat, and one morning not long after the
Title:  German ship Jungfrau disappeared, took more than customary pains in
Title:  that occupation; crawling under its bottom, where it hung over the
Title:  side, and rubbing in the unctuousness as though diligently seeking to
Title:  insure a crop of hair from the craft's bald keel.  He seemed to be
Title:  working in obedience to some particular presentiment.  Nor did it
Title:  remain unwarranted by the event.
Title:  
Title:  Towards noon whales were raised; but so soon as the ship sailed down
Title:  to them, they turned and fled with swift precipitancy; a disordered
Title:  flight, as of Cleopatra's barges from Actium.
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless, the boats pursued, and Stubb's was foremost.  By great
Title:  exertion, Tashtego at last succeeded in planting one iron; but the
Title:  stricken whale, without at all sounding, still continued his
Title:  horizontal flight, with added fleetness.  Such unintermitted
Title:  strainings upon the planted iron must sooner or later inevitably
Title:  extract it.  It became imperative to lance the flying whale, or be
Title:  content to lose him.  But to haul the boat up to his flank was
Title:  impossible, he swam so fast and furious.  What then remained?
Title:  
Title:  Of all the wondrous devices and dexterities, the sleights of hand and
Title:  countless subtleties, to which the veteran whaleman is so often
Title:  forced, none exceed that fine manoeuvre with the lance called
Title:  pitchpoling.  Small sword, or broad sword, in all its exercises
Title:  boasts nothing like it.  It is only indispensable with an inveterate
Title:  running whale; its grand fact and feature is the wonderful distance
Title:  to which the long lance is accurately darted from a violently
Title:  rocking, jerking boat, under extreme headway.  Steel and wood
Title:  included, the entire spear is some ten or twelve feet in length; the
Title:  staff is much slighter than that of the harpoon, and also of a
Title:  lighter material--pine.  It is furnished with a small rope called a
Title:  warp, of considerable length, by which it can be hauled back to the
Title:  hand after darting.
Title:  
Title:  But before going further, it is important to mention here, that
Title:  though the harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the lance,
Title:  yet it is seldom done; and when done, is still less frequently
Title:  successful, on account of the greater weight and inferior length of
Title:  the harpoon as compared with the lance, which in effect become
Title:  serious drawbacks.  As a general thing, therefore, you must first
Title:  get fast to a whale, before any pitchpoling comes into play.
Title:  
Title:  Look now at Stubb; a man who from his humorous, deliberate coolness
Title:  and equanimity in the direst emergencies, was specially qualified to
Title:  excel in pitchpoling.  Look at him; he stands upright in the tossed
Title:  bow of the flying boat; wrapt in fleecy foam, the towing whale is
Title:  forty feet ahead.  Handling the long lance lightly, glancing twice or
Title:  thrice along its length to see if it be exactly straight, Stubb
Title:  whistlingly gathers up the coil of the warp in one hand, so as to
Title:  secure its free end in his grasp, leaving the rest unobstructed.
Title:  Then holding the lance full before his waistband's middle, he levels
Title:  it at the whale; when, covering him with it, he steadily depresses
Title:  the butt-end in his hand, thereby elevating the point till the weapon
Title:  stands fairly balanced upon his palm, fifteen feet in the air.  He
Title:  minds you somewhat of a juggler, balancing a long staff on his chin.
Title:  Next moment with a rapid, nameless impulse, in a superb lofty arch the
Title:  bright steel spans the foaming distance, and quivers in the life spot
Title:  of the whale.  Instead of sparkling water, he now spouts red blood.
Title:  
Title:  "That drove the spigot out of him!" cried Stubb.  "'Tis July's
Title:  immortal Fourth; all fountains must run wine today!  Would now, it
Title:  were old Orleans whiskey, or old Ohio, or unspeakable old
Title:  Monongahela!  Then, Tashtego, lad, I'd have ye hold a canakin to the
Title:  jet, and we'd drink round it!  Yea, verily, hearts alive, we'd brew
Title:  choice punch in the spread of his spout-hole there, and from that
Title:  live punch-bowl quaff the living stuff."
Title:  
Title:  Again and again to such gamesome talk, the dexterous dart is
Title:  repeated, the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held in
Title:  skilful leash.  The agonized whale goes into his flurry; the tow-line
Title:  is slackened, and the pitchpoler dropping astern, folds his hands,
Title:  and mutely watches the monster die.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 85
Title:  
Title:  The Fountain.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  That for six thousand years--and no one knows how many millions of
Title:  ages before--the great whales should have been spouting all over the
Title:  sea, and sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the deep, as with
Title:  so many sprinkling or mistifying pots; and that for some centuries
Title:  back, thousands of hunters should have been close by the fountain of
Title:  the whale, watching these sprinklings and spoutings--that all this
Title:  should be, and yet, that down to this blessed minute (fifteen and a
Title:  quarter minutes past one o'clock P.M. of this sixteenth day of
Title:  December, A.D. 1851), it should still remain a problem, whether these
Title:  spoutings are, after all, really water, or nothing but vapour--this is
Title:  surely a noteworthy thing.
Title:  
Title:  Let us, then, look at this matter, along with some interesting items
Title:  contingent.  Every one knows that by the peculiar cunning of their
Title:  gills, the finny tribes in general breathe the air which at all times
Title:  is combined with the element in which they swim; hence, a herring or
Title:  a cod might live a century, and never once raise its head above the
Title:  surface.  But owing to his marked internal structure which gives him
Title:  regular lungs, like a human being's, the whale can only live by
Title:  inhaling the disengaged air in the open atmosphere.  Wherefore the
Title:  necessity for his periodical visits to the upper world.  But he
Title:  cannot in any degree breathe through his mouth, for, in his ordinary
Title:  attitude, the Sperm Whale's mouth is buried at least eight feet
Title:  beneath the surface; and what is still more, his windpipe has no
Title:  connexion with his mouth.  No, he breathes through his spiracle
Title:  alone; and this is on the top of his head.
Title:  
Title:  If I say, that in any creature breathing is only a function
Title:  indispensable to vitality, inasmuch as it withdraws from the air a
Title:  certain element, which being subsequently brought into contact with
Title:  the blood imparts to the blood its vivifying principle, I do not
Title:  think I shall err; though I may possibly use some superfluous
Title:  scientific words.  Assume it, and it follows that if all the blood in
Title:  a man could be aerated with one breath, he might then seal up his
Title:  nostrils and not fetch another for a considerable time.  That is to
Title:  say, he would then live without breathing.  Anomalous as it may seem,
Title:  this is precisely the case with the whale, who systematically lives,
Title:  by intervals, his full hour and more (when at the bottom) without
Title:  drawing a single breath, or so much as in any way inhaling a particle
Title:  of air; for, remember, he has no gills.  How is this?  Between his
Title:  ribs and on each side of his spine he is supplied with a remarkable
Title:  involved Cretan labyrinth of vermicelli-like vessels, which vessels,
Title:  when he quits the surface, are completely distended with oxygenated
Title:  blood.  So that for an hour or more, a thousand fathoms in the sea,
Title:  he carries a surplus stock of vitality in him, just as the camel
Title:  crossing the waterless desert carries a surplus supply of drink for
Title:  future use in its four supplementary stomachs.  The anatomical fact
Title:  of this labyrinth is indisputable; and that the supposition founded
Title:  upon it is reasonable and true, seems the more cogent to me, when I
Title:  consider the otherwise inexplicable obstinacy of that leviathan in
Title:  HAVING HIS SPOUTINGS OUT, as the fishermen phrase it.  This is what I
Title:  mean.  If unmolested, upon rising to the surface, the Sperm Whale
Title:  will continue there for a period of time exactly uniform with all his
Title:  other unmolested risings.  Say he stays eleven minutes, and jets
Title:  seventy times, that is, respires seventy breaths; then whenever he
Title:  rises again, he will be sure to have his seventy breaths over again,
Title:  to a minute.  Now, if after he fetches a few breaths you alarm him,
Title:  so that he sounds, he will be always dodging up again to make good
Title:  his regular allowance of air.  And not till those seventy breaths are
Title:  told, will he finally go down to stay out his full term below.
Title:  Remark, however, that in different individuals these rates are
Title:  different; but in any one they are alike.  Now, why should the whale
Title:  thus insist upon having his spoutings out, unless it be to replenish
Title:  his reservoir of air, ere descending for good?  How obvious is it,
Title:  too, that this necessity for the whale's rising exposes him to all
Title:  the fatal hazards of the chase.  For not by hook or by net could
Title:  this vast leviathan be caught, when sailing a thousand fathoms
Title:  beneath the sunlight.  Not so much thy skill, then, O hunter, as the
Title:  great necessities that strike the victory to thee!
Title:  
Title:  In man, breathing is incessantly going on--one breath only serving
Title:  for two or three pulsations; so that whatever other business he has
Title:  to attend to, waking or sleeping, breathe he must, or die he will.
Title:  But the Sperm Whale only breathes about one seventh or Sunday of his
Title:  time.
Title:  
Title:  It has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole;
Title:  if it could truthfully be added that his spouts are mixed with water,
Title:  then I opine we should be furnished with the reason why his sense of
Title:  smell seems obliterated in him; for the only thing about him that at
Title:  all answers to his nose is that identical spout-hole; and being so
Title:  clogged with two elements, it could not be expected to have the power
Title:  of smelling.  But owing to the mystery of the spout--whether it be
Title:  water or whether it be vapour--no absolute certainty can as yet be
Title:  arrived at on this head.  Sure it is, nevertheless, that the Sperm
Title:  Whale has no proper olfactories.  But what does he want of them?  No
Title:  roses, no violets, no Cologne-water in the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Furthermore, as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of his
Title:  spouting canal, and as that long canal--like the grand Erie Canal--is
Title:  furnished with a sort of locks (that open and shut) for the downward
Title:  retention of air or the upward exclusion of water, therefore the
Title:  whale has no voice; unless you insult him by saying, that when he so
Title:  strangely rumbles, he talks through his nose.  But then again, what
Title:  has the whale to say?  Seldom have I known any profound being that
Title:  had anything to say to this world, unless forced to stammer out
Title:  something by way of getting a living.  Oh! happy that the world is
Title:  such an excellent listener!
Title:  
Title:  Now, the spouting canal of the Sperm Whale, chiefly intended as it is
Title:  for the conveyance of air, and for several feet laid along,
Title:  horizontally, just beneath the upper surface of his head, and a
Title:  little to one side; this curious canal is very much like a gas-pipe
Title:  laid down in a city on one side of a street.  But the question
Title:  returns whether this gas-pipe is also a water-pipe; in other words,
Title:  whether the spout of the Sperm Whale is the mere vapour of the exhaled
Title:  breath, or whether that exhaled breath is mixed with water taken in
Title:  at the mouth, and discharged through the spiracle.  It is certain
Title:  that the mouth indirectly communicates with the spouting canal; but
Title:  it cannot be proved that this is for the purpose of discharging water
Title:  through the spiracle.  Because the greatest necessity for so doing
Title:  would seem to be, when in feeding he accidentally takes in water.
Title:  But the Sperm Whale's food is far beneath the surface, and there he
Title:  cannot spout even if he would.  Besides, if you regard him very
Title:  closely, and time him with your watch, you will find that when
Title:  unmolested, there is an undeviating rhyme between the periods of his
Title:  jets and the ordinary periods of respiration.
Title:  
Title:  But why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject?  Speak
Title:  out!  You have seen him spout; then declare what the spout is; can
Title:  you not tell water from air?  My dear sir, in this world it is not so
Title:  easy to settle these plain things.  I have ever found your plain
Title:  things the knottiest of all.  And as for this whale spout, you might
Title:  almost stand in it, and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely.
Title:  
Title:  The central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mist
Title:  enveloping it; and how can you certainly tell whether any water falls
Title:  from it, when, always, when you are close enough to a whale to get a
Title:  close view of his spout, he is in a prodigious commotion, the water
Title:  cascading all around him.  And if at such times you should think that
Title:  you really perceived drops of moisture in the spout, how do you know
Title:  that they are not merely condensed from its vapour; or how do you know
Title:  that they are not those identical drops superficially lodged in the
Title:  spout-hole fissure, which is countersunk into the summit of the
Title:  whale's head?  For even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day
Title:  sea in a calm, with his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary's in
Title:  the desert; even then, the whale always carries a small basin of
Title:  water on his head, as under a blazing sun you will sometimes see a
Title:  cavity in a rock filled up with rain.
Title:  
Title:  Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touching
Title:  the precise nature of the whale spout.  It will not do for him to be
Title:  peering into it, and putting his face in it.  You cannot go with your
Title:  pitcher to this fountain and fill it, and bring it away.  For even
Title:  when coming into slight contact with the outer, vapoury shreds of the
Title:  jet, which will often happen, your skin will feverishly smart, from
Title:  the acridness of the thing so touching it.  And I know one, who
Title:  coming into still closer contact with the spout, whether with some
Title:  scientific object in view, or otherwise, I cannot say, the skin
Title:  peeled off from his cheek and arm.  Wherefore, among whalemen, the
Title:  spout is deemed poisonous; they try to evade it.  Another thing; I
Title:  have heard it said, and I do not much doubt it, that if the jet is
Title:  fairly spouted into your eyes, it will blind you.  The wisest thing
Title:  the investigator can do then, it seems to me, is to let this deadly
Title:  spout alone.
Title:  
Title:  Still, we can hypothesize, even if we cannot prove and establish.  My
Title:  hypothesis is this: that the spout is nothing but mist.  And besides
Title:  other reasons, to this conclusion I am impelled, by considerations
Title:  touching the great inherent dignity and sublimity of the Sperm Whale;
Title:  I account him no common, shallow being, inasmuch as it is an
Title:  undisputed fact that he is never found on soundings, or near shores;
Title:  all other whales sometimes are.  He is both ponderous and profound.
Title:  And I am convinced that from the heads of all ponderous profound
Title:  beings, such as Plato, Pyrrho, the Devil, Jupiter, Dante, and so on,
Title:  there always goes up a certain semi-visible steam, while in the act
Title:  of thinking deep thoughts.  While composing a little treatise on
Title:  Eternity, I had the curiosity to place a mirror before me; and ere
Title:  long saw reflected there, a curious involved worming and undulation
Title:  in the atmosphere over my head.  The invariable moisture of my hair,
Title:  while plunged in deep thought, after six cups of hot tea in my thin
Title:  shingled attic, of an August noon; this seems an additional argument
Title:  for the above supposition.
Title:  
Title:  And how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty, misty monster, to
Title:  behold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea; his vast,
Title:  mild head overhung by a canopy of vapour, engendered by his
Title:  incommunicable contemplations, and that vapour--as you will sometimes
Title:  see it--glorified by a rainbow, as if Heaven itself had put its seal
Title:  upon his thoughts.  For, d'ye see, rainbows do not visit the clear
Title:  air; they only irradiate vapour.  And so, through all the thick mists
Title:  of the dim doubts in my mind, divine intuitions now and then shoot,
Title:  enkindling my fog with a heavenly ray.  And for this I thank God; for
Title:  all have doubts; many deny; but doubts or denials, few along with
Title:  them, have intuitions.  Doubts of all things earthly, and intuitions
Title:  of some things heavenly; this combination makes neither believer nor
Title:  infidel, but makes a man who regards them both with equal eye.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 86
Title:  
Title:  The Tail.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope,
Title:  and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; less
Title:  celestial, I celebrate a tail.
Title:  
Title:  Reckoning the largest sized Sperm Whale's tail to begin at that point
Title:  of the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man, it
Title:  comprises upon its upper surface alone, an area of at least fifty
Title:  square feet.  The compact round body of its root expands into two
Title:  broad, firm, flat palms or flukes, gradually shoaling away to less
Title:  than an inch in thickness.  At the crotch or junction, these flukes
Title:  slightly overlap, then sideways recede from each other like wings,
Title:  leaving a wide vacancy between.  In no living thing are the lines of
Title:  beauty more exquisitely defined than in the crescentic borders of
Title:  these flukes.  At its utmost expansion in the full grown whale, the
Title:  tail will considerably exceed twenty feet across.
Title:  
Title:  The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews; but cut
Title:  into it, and you find that three distinct strata compose it:--upper,
Title:  middle, and lower.  The fibres in the upper and lower layers, are
Title:  long and horizontal; those of the middle one, very short, and running
Title:  crosswise between the outside layers.  This triune structure, as much
Title:  as anything else, imparts power to the tail.  To the student of old
Title:  Roman walls, the middle layer will furnish a curious parallel to the
Title:  thin course of tiles always alternating with the stone in those
Title:  wonderful relics of the antique, and which undoubtedly contribute so
Title:  much to the great strength of the masonry.
Title:  
Title:  But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not
Title:  enough, the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and
Title:  woof of muscular fibres and filaments, which passing on either side
Title:  the loins and running down into the flukes, insensibly blend with
Title:  them, and largely contribute to their might; so that in the tail the
Title:  confluent measureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated to
Title:  a point.  Could annihilation occur to matter, this were the thing to
Title:  do it.
Title:  
Title:  Nor does this--its amazing strength, at all tend to cripple the
Title:  graceful flexion of its motions; where infantileness of ease
Title:  undulates through a Titanism of power.  On the contrary, those
Title:  motions derive their most appalling beauty from it.  Real strength
Title:  never impairs beauty or harmony, but it often bestows it; and in
Title:  everything imposingly beautiful, strength has much to do with the
Title:  magic.  Take away the tied tendons that all over seem bursting from
Title:  the marble in the carved Hercules, and its charm would be gone.  As
Title:  devout Eckerman lifted the linen sheet from the naked corpse of
Title:  Goethe, he was overwhelmed with the massive chest of the man, that
Title:  seemed as a Roman triumphal arch.  When Angelo paints even God the
Title:  Father in human form, mark what robustness is there.  And whatever
Title:  they may reveal of the divine love in the Son, the soft, curled,
Title:  hermaphroditical Italian pictures, in which his idea has been most
Title:  successfully embodied; these pictures, so destitute as they are of
Title:  all brawniness, hint nothing of any power, but the mere negative,
Title:  feminine one of submission and endurance, which on all hands it is
Title:  conceded, form the peculiar practical virtues of his teachings.
Title:  
Title:  Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of, that whether
Title:  wielded in sport, or in earnest, or in anger, whatever be the mood it
Title:  be in, its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace.
Title:  Therein no fairy's arm can transcend it.
Title:  
Title:  Five great motions are peculiar to it.  First, when used as a fin for
Title:  progression; Second, when used as a mace in battle; Third, in
Title:  sweeping; Fourth, in lobtailing; Fifth, in peaking flukes.
Title:  
Title:  First: Being horizontal in its position, the Leviathan's tail acts in
Title:  a different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures.  It
Title:  never wriggles.  In man or fish, wriggling is a sign of inferiority.
Title:  To the whale, his tail is the sole means of propulsion.  Scroll-wise
Title:  coiled forwards beneath the body, and then rapidly sprung backwards,
Title:  it is this which gives that singular darting, leaping motion to the
Title:  monster when furiously swimming.  His side-fins only serve to steer
Title:  by.
Title:  
Title:  Second: It is a little significant, that while one sperm whale only
Title:  fights another sperm whale with his head and jaw, nevertheless, in
Title:  his conflicts with man, he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail.
Title:  In striking at a boat, he swiftly curves away his flukes from it, and
Title:  the blow is only inflicted by the recoil.  If it be made in the
Title:  unobstructed air, especially if it descend to its mark, the stroke is
Title:  then simply irresistible.  No ribs of man or boat can withstand it.
Title:  Your only salvation lies in eluding it; but if it comes sideways
Title:  through the opposing water, then partly owing to the light buoyancy
Title:  of the whale boat, and the elasticity of its materials, a cracked
Title:  rib or a dashed plank or two, a sort of stitch in the side, is
Title:  generally the most serious result.  These submerged side blows are so
Title:  often received in the fishery, that they are accounted mere child's
Title:  play.  Some one strips off a frock, and the hole is stopped.
Title:  
Title:  Third: I cannot demonstrate it, but it seems to me, that in the whale
Title:  the sense of touch is concentrated in the tail; for in this respect
Title:  there is a delicacy in it only equalled by the daintiness of the
Title:  elephant's trunk.  This delicacy is chiefly evinced in the action of
Title:  sweeping, when in maidenly gentleness the whale with a certain soft
Title:  slowness moves his immense flukes from side to side upon the surface of
Title:  the sea; and if he feel but a sailor's whisker, woe to that sailor,
Title:  whiskers and all.  What tenderness there is in that preliminary
Title:  touch!  Had this tail any prehensile power, I should straightway
Title:  bethink me of Darmonodes' elephant that so frequented the
Title:  flower-market, and with low salutations presented nosegays to
Title:  damsels, and then caressed their zones.  On more accounts than one, a
Title:  pity it is that the whale does not possess this prehensile virtue in
Title:  his tail; for I have heard of yet another elephant, that when wounded
Title:  in the fight, curved round his trunk and extracted the dart.
Title:  
Title:  Fourth: Stealing unawares upon the whale in the fancied security of
Title:  the middle of solitary seas, you find him unbent from the vast
Title:  corpulence of his dignity, and kitten-like, he plays on the ocean as
Title:  if it were a hearth.  But still you see his power in his play.  The
Title:  broad palms of his tail are flirted high into the air; then smiting
Title:  the surface, the thunderous concussion resounds for miles.  You would
Title:  almost think a great gun had been discharged; and if you noticed the
Title:  light wreath of vapour from the spiracle at his other extremity, you
Title:  would think that that was the smoke from the touch-hole.
Title:  
Title:  Fifth: As in the ordinary floating posture of the leviathan the
Title:  flukes lie considerably below the level of his back, they are then
Title:  completely out of sight beneath the surface; but when he is about to
Title:  plunge into the deeps, his entire flukes with at least thirty feet of
Title:  his body are tossed erect in the air, and so remain vibrating a
Title:  moment, till they downwards shoot out of view.  Excepting the sublime
Title:  BREACH--somewhere else to be described--this peaking of the whale's
Title:  flukes is perhaps the grandest sight to be seen in all animated
Title:  nature.  Out of the bottomless profundities the gigantic tail seems
Title:  spasmodically snatching at the highest heaven.  So in dreams, have I
Title:  seen majestic Satan thrusting forth his tormented colossal claw from
Title:  the flame Baltic of Hell.  But in gazing at such scenes, it is all in
Title:  all what mood you are in; if in the Dantean, the devils will occur to
Title:  you; if in that of Isaiah, the archangels.  Standing at the mast-head
Title:  of my ship during a sunrise that crimsoned sky and sea, I once saw a
Title:  large herd of whales in the east, all heading towards the sun, and
Title:  for a moment vibrating in concert with peaked flukes.  As it seemed
Title:  to me at the time, such a grand embodiment of adoration of the gods
Title:  was never beheld, even in Persia, the home of the fire worshippers.
Title:  As Ptolemy Philopater testified of the African elephant, I then
Title:  testified of the whale, pronouncing him the most devout of all
Title:  beings.  For according to King Juba, the military elephants of
Title:  antiquity often hailed the morning with their trunks uplifted in the
Title:  profoundest silence.
Title:  
Title:  The chance comparison in this chapter, between the whale and the
Title:  elephant, so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunk
Title:  of the other are concerned, should not tend to place those two
Title:  opposite organs on an equality, much less the creatures to which they
Title:  respectively belong.  For as the mightiest elephant is but a terrier
Title:  to Leviathan, so, compared with Leviathan's tail, his trunk is but
Title:  the stalk of a lily.  The most direful blow from the elephant's trunk
Title:  were as the playful tap of a fan, compared with the measureless crush
Title:  and crash of the sperm whale's ponderous flukes, which in repeated
Title:  instances have one after the other hurled entire boats with all their
Title:  oars and crews into the air, very much as an Indian juggler tosses
Title:  his balls.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *Though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whale
Title:  and the elephant is preposterous, inasmuch as in that particular the
Title:  elephant stands in much the same respect to the whale that a dog does
Title:  to the elephant; nevertheless, there are not wanting some points of
Title:  curious similitude; among these is the spout.  It is well known that
Title:  the elephant will often draw up water or dust in his trunk, and then
Title:  elevating it, jet it forth in a stream.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The more I consider this mighty tail, the more do I deplore my
Title:  inability to express it.  At times there are gestures in it, which,
Title:  though they would well grace the hand of man, remain wholly
Title:  inexplicable.  In an extensive herd, so remarkable, occasionally, are
Title:  these mystic gestures, that I have heard hunters who have declared
Title:  them akin to Free-Mason signs and symbols; that the whale, indeed, by
Title:  these methods intelligently conversed with the world.  Nor are there
Title:  wanting other motions of the whale in his general body, full of
Title:  strangeness, and unaccountable to his most experienced assailant.
Title:  Dissect him how I may, then, I but go skin deep; I know him not,
Title:  and never will.  But if I know not even the tail of this whale, how
Title:  understand his head? much more, how comprehend his face, when face he
Title:  has none?  Thou shalt see my back parts, my tail, he seems to say,
Title:  but my face shall not be seen.  But I cannot completely make out his
Title:  back parts; and hint what he will about his face, I say again he has
Title:  no face.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 87
Title:  
Title:  The Grand Armada.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The long and narrow peninsula of Malacca, extending south-eastward
Title:  from the territories of Birmah, forms the most southerly point of all
Title:  Asia.  In a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the long
Title:  islands of Sumatra, Java, Bally, and Timor; which, with many others,
Title:  form a vast mole, or rampart, lengthwise connecting Asia with
Title:  Australia, and dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from the
Title:  thickly studded oriental archipelagoes.  This rampart is pierced by
Title:  several sally-ports for the convenience of ships and whales;
Title:  conspicuous among which are the straits of Sunda and Malacca.  By the
Title:  straits of Sunda, chiefly, vessels bound to China from the west,
Title:  emerge into the China seas.
Title:  
Title:  Those narrow straits of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java; and standing
Title:  midway in that vast rampart of islands, buttressed by that bold green
Title:  promontory, known to seamen as Java Head; they not a little
Title:  correspond to the central gateway opening into some vast walled
Title:  empire: and considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices, and
Title:  silks, and jewels, and gold, and ivory, with which the thousand
Title:  islands of that oriental sea are enriched, it seems a significant
Title:  provision of nature, that such treasures, by the very formation of
Title:  the land, should at least bear the appearance, however ineffectual,
Title:  of being guarded from the all-grasping western world.  The shores of
Title:  the Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with those domineering fortresses
Title:  which guard the entrances to the Mediterranean, the Baltic, and the
Title:  Propontis.  Unlike the Danes, these Orientals do not demand the
Title:  obsequious homage of lowered top-sails from the endless procession of
Title:  ships before the wind, which for centuries past, by night and by day,
Title:  have passed between the islands of Sumatra and Java, freighted with
Title:  the costliest cargoes of the east.  But while they freely waive a
Title:  ceremonial like this, they do by no means renounce their claim to
Title:  more solid tribute.
Title:  
Title:  Time out of mind the piratical proas of the Malays, lurking among the
Title:  low shaded coves and islets of Sumatra, have sallied out upon the
Title:  vessels sailing through the straits, fiercely demanding tribute at
Title:  the point of their spears.  Though by the repeated bloody
Title:  chastisements they have received at the hands of European cruisers,
Title:  the audacity of these corsairs has of late been somewhat repressed;
Title:  yet, even at the present day, we occasionally hear of English and
Title:  American vessels, which, in those waters, have been remorselessly
Title:  boarded and pillaged.
Title:  
Title:  With a fair, fresh wind, the Pequod was now drawing nigh to these
Title:  straits; Ahab purposing to pass through them into the Javan sea, and
Title:  thence, cruising northwards, over waters known to be frequented here
Title:  and there by the Sperm Whale, sweep inshore by the Philippine
Title:  Islands, and gain the far coast of Japan, in time for the great
Title:  whaling season there.  By these means, the circumnavigating Pequod
Title:  would sweep almost all the known Sperm Whale cruising grounds of the
Title:  world, previous to descending upon the Line in the Pacific; where
Title:  Ahab, though everywhere else foiled in his pursuit, firmly counted
Title:  upon giving battle to Moby Dick, in the sea he was most known to
Title:  frequent; and at a season when he might most reasonably be presumed
Title:  to be haunting it.
Title:  
Title:  But how now? in this zoned quest, does Ahab touch no land? does his
Title:  crew drink air?  Surely, he will stop for water.  Nay.  For a long
Title:  time, now, the circus-running sun has raced within his fiery ring,
Title:  and needs no sustenance but what's in himself.  So Ahab.  Mark this,
Title:  too, in the whaler.  While other hulls are loaded down with alien
Title:  stuff, to be transferred to foreign wharves; the world-wandering
Title:  whale-ship carries no cargo but herself and crew, their weapons and
Title:  their wants.  She has a whole lake's contents bottled in her ample
Title:  hold.  She is ballasted with utilities; not altogether with unusable
Title:  pig-lead and kentledge.  She carries years' water in her.  Clear old
Title:  prime Nantucket water; which, when three years afloat, the
Title:  Nantucketer, in the Pacific, prefers to drink before the brackish
Title:  fluid, but yesterday rafted off in casks, from the Peruvian or Indian
Title:  streams.  Hence it is, that, while other ships may have gone to China
Title:  from New York, and back again, touching at a score of ports, the
Title:  whale-ship, in all that interval, may not have sighted one grain of
Title:  soil; her crew having seen no man but floating seamen like
Title:  themselves.  So that did you carry them the news that another flood
Title:  had come; they would only answer--"Well, boys, here's the ark!"
Title:  
Title:  Now, as many Sperm Whales had been captured off the western coast of
Title:  Java, in the near vicinity of the Straits of Sunda; indeed, as most
Title:  of the ground, roundabout, was generally recognised by the fishermen
Title:  as an excellent spot for cruising; therefore, as the Pequod gained
Title:  more and more upon Java Head, the look-outs were repeatedly hailed,
Title:  and admonished to keep wide awake.  But though the green palmy cliffs
Title:  of the land soon loomed on the starboard bow, and with delighted
Title:  nostrils the fresh cinnamon was snuffed in the air, yet not a single
Title:  jet was descried.  Almost renouncing all thought of falling in with
Title:  any game hereabouts, the ship had well nigh entered the straits, when
Title:  the customary cheering cry was heard from aloft, and ere long a
Title:  spectacle of singular magnificence saluted us.
Title:  
Title:  But here be it premised, that owing to the unwearied activity with
Title:  which of late they have been hunted over all four oceans, the Sperm
Title:  Whales, instead of almost invariably sailing in small detached
Title:  companies, as in former times, are now frequently met with in
Title:  extensive herds, sometimes embracing so great a multitude, that it
Title:  would almost seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn solemn
Title:  league and covenant for mutual assistance and protection.  To this
Title:  aggregation of the Sperm Whale into such immense caravans, may be
Title:  imputed the circumstance that even in the best cruising grounds, you
Title:  may now sometimes sail for weeks and months together, without being
Title:  greeted by a single spout; and then be suddenly saluted by what
Title:  sometimes seems thousands on thousands.
Title:  
Title:  Broad on both bows, at the distance of some two or three miles, and
Title:  forming a great semicircle, embracing one half of the level horizon,
Title:  a continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in the
Title:  noon-day air.  Unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets of the
Title:  Right Whale, which, dividing at top, fall over in two branches, like
Title:  the cleft drooping boughs of a willow, the single forward-slanting
Title:  spout of the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist,
Title:  continually rising and falling away to leeward.
Title:  
Title:  Seen from the Pequod's deck, then, as she would rise on a high hill
Title:  of the sea, this host of vapoury spouts, individually curling up into
Title:  the air, and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze,
Title:  showed like the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis,
Title:  descried of a balmy autumnal morning, by some horseman on a height.
Title:  
Title:  As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains,
Title:  accelerate their march, all eagerness to place that perilous passage
Title:  in their rear, and once more expand in comparative security upon the
Title:  plain; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying
Title:  forward through the straits; gradually contracting the wings of their
Title:  semicircle, and swimming on, in one solid, but still crescentic
Title:  centre.
Title:  
Title:  Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them; the harpooneers
Title:  handling their weapons, and loudly cheering from the heads of their
Title:  yet suspended boats.  If the wind only held, little doubt had they,
Title:  that chased through these Straits of Sunda, the vast host would only
Title:  deploy into the Oriental seas to witness the capture of not a few of
Title:  their number.  And who could tell whether, in that congregated
Title:  caravan, Moby Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming, like
Title:  the worshipped white-elephant in the coronation procession of the
Title:  Siamese!  So with stun-sail piled on stun-sail, we sailed along,
Title:  driving these leviathans before us; when, of a sudden, the voice of
Title:  Tashtego was heard, loudly directing attention to something in our
Title:  wake.
Title:  
Title:  Corresponding to the crescent in our van, we beheld another in our
Title:  rear.  It seemed formed of detached white vapours, rising and falling
Title:  something like the spouts of the whales; only they did not so
Title:  completely come and go; for they constantly hovered, without finally
Title:  disappearing.  Levelling his glass at this sight, Ahab quickly
Title:  revolved in his pivot-hole, crying, "Aloft there, and rig whips and
Title:  buckets to wet the sails;--Malays, sir, and after us!"
Title:  
Title:  As if too long lurking behind the headlands, till the Pequod should
Title:  fairly have entered the straits, these rascally Asiatics were now in
Title:  hot pursuit, to make up for their over-cautious delay.  But when the
Title:  swift Pequod, with a fresh leading wind, was herself in hot chase;
Title:  how very kind of these tawny philanthropists to assist in speeding
Title:  her on to her own chosen pursuit,--mere riding-whips and rowels to
Title:  her, that they were.  As with glass under arm, Ahab to-and-fro paced
Title:  the deck; in his forward turn beholding the monsters he chased, and
Title:  in the after one the bloodthirsty pirates chasing him; some such
Title:  fancy as the above seemed his.  And when he glanced upon the green
Title:  walls of the watery defile in which the ship was then sailing, and
Title:  bethought him that through that gate lay the route to his vengeance,
Title:  and beheld, how that through that same gate he was now both chasing
Title:  and being chased to his deadly end; and not only that, but a herd of
Title:  remorseless wild pirates and inhuman atheistical devils were
Title:  infernally cheering him on with their curses;--when all these
Title:  conceits had passed through his brain, Ahab's brow was left gaunt and
Title:  ribbed, like the black sand beach after some stormy tide has been
Title:  gnawing it, without being able to drag the firm thing from its place.
Title:  
Title:  But thoughts like these troubled very few of the reckless crew; and
Title:  when, after steadily dropping and dropping the pirates astern, the
Title:  Pequod at last shot by the vivid green Cockatoo Point on the Sumatra
Title:  side, emerging at last upon the broad waters beyond; then, the
Title:  harpooneers seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had been
Title:  gaining upon the ship, than to rejoice that the ship had so
Title:  victoriously gained upon the Malays.  But still driving on in the
Title:  wake of the whales, at length they seemed abating their speed;
Title:  gradually the ship neared them; and the wind now dying away, word was
Title:  passed to spring to the boats.  But no sooner did the herd, by some
Title:  presumed wonderful instinct of the Sperm Whale, become notified of
Title:  the three keels that were after them,--though as yet a mile in their
Title:  rear,--than they rallied again, and forming in close ranks and
Title:  battalions, so that their spouts all looked like flashing lines of
Title:  stacked bayonets, moved on with redoubled velocity.
Title:  
Title:  Stripped to our shirts and drawers, we sprang to the white-ash, and
Title:  after several hours' pulling were almost disposed to renounce the
Title:  chase, when a general pausing commotion among the whales gave
Title:  animating token that they were now at last under the influence of
Title:  that strange perplexity of inert irresolution, which, when the
Title:  fishermen perceive it in the whale, they say he is gallied.  The
Title:  compact martial columns in which they had been hitherto rapidly and
Title:  steadily swimming, were now broken up in one measureless rout; and
Title:  like King Porus' elephants in the Indian battle with Alexander, they
Title:  seemed going mad with consternation.  In all directions expanding in
Title:  vast irregular circles, and aimlessly swimming hither and thither, by
Title:  their short thick spoutings, they plainly betrayed their distraction
Title:  of panic.  This was still more strangely evinced by those of their
Title:  number, who, completely paralysed as it were, helplessly floated like
Title:  water-logged dismantled ships on the sea.  Had these Leviathans been
Title:  but a flock of simple sheep, pursued over the pasture by three fierce
Title:  wolves, they could not possibly have evinced such excessive dismay.
Title:  But this occasional timidity is characteristic of almost all herding
Title:  creatures.  Though banding together in tens of thousands, the
Title:  lion-maned buffaloes of the West have fled before a solitary
Title:  horseman.  Witness, too, all human beings, how when herded together
Title:  in the sheepfold of a theatre's pit, they will, at the slightest
Title:  alarm of fire, rush helter-skelter for the outlets, crowding,
Title:  trampling, jamming, and remorselessly dashing each other to death.
Title:  Best, therefore, withhold any amazement at the strangely gallied
Title:  whales before us, for there is no folly of the beasts of the earth
Title:  which is not infinitely outdone by the madness of men.
Title:  
Title:  Though many of the whales, as has been said, were in violent motion,
Title:  yet it is to be observed that as a whole the herd neither advanced
Title:  nor retreated, but collectively remained in one place.  As is
Title:  customary in those cases, the boats at once separated, each making
Title:  for some one lone whale on the outskirts of the shoal.  In about
Title:  three minutes' time, Queequeg's harpoon was flung; the stricken fish
Title:  darted blinding spray in our faces, and then running away with us like
Title:  light, steered straight for the heart of the herd.  Though such a
Title:  movement on the part of the whale struck under such circumstances, is
Title:  in no wise unprecedented; and indeed is almost always more or less
Title:  anticipated; yet does it present one of the more perilous
Title:  vicissitudes of the fishery.  For as the swift monster drags you
Title:  deeper and deeper into the frantic shoal, you bid adieu to
Title:  circumspect life and only exist in a delirious throb.
Title:  
Title:  As, blind and deaf, the whale plunged forward, as if by sheer power
Title:  of speed to rid himself of the iron leech that had fastened to him;
Title:  as we thus tore a white gash in the sea, on all sides menaced as we
Title:  flew, by the crazed creatures to and fro rushing about us; our beset
Title:  boat was like a ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tempest, and striving
Title:  to steer through their complicated channels and straits, knowing not at
Title:  what moment it may be locked in and crushed.
Title:  
Title:  But not a bit daunted, Queequeg steered us manfully; now sheering off
Title:  from this monster directly across our route in advance; now edging
Title:  away from that, whose colossal flukes were suspended overhead, while
Title:  all the time, Starbuck stood up in the bows, lance in hand, pricking
Title:  out of our way whatever whales he could reach by short darts, for
Title:  there was no time to make long ones.  Nor were the oarsmen quite
Title:  idle, though their wonted duty was now altogether dispensed with.
Title:  They chiefly attended to the shouting part of the business.  "Out of
Title:  the way, Commodore!" cried one, to a great dromedary that of a sudden
Title:  rose bodily to the surface, and for an instant threatened to swamp
Title:  us.  "Hard down with your tail, there!" cried a second to another,
Title:  which, close to our gunwale, seemed calmly cooling himself with his
Title:  own fan-like extremity.
Title:  
Title:  All whaleboats carry certain curious contrivances, originally
Title:  invented by the Nantucket Indians, called druggs.  Two thick squares
Title:  of wood of equal size are stoutly clenched together, so that they
Title:  cross each other's grain at right angles; a line of considerable
Title:  length is then attached to the middle of this block, and the other
Title:  end of the line being looped, it can in a moment be fastened to a
Title:  harpoon.  It is chiefly among gallied whales that this drugg is used.
Title:  For then, more whales are close round you than you can possibly
Title:  chase at one time.  But sperm whales are not every day encountered;
Title:  while you may, then, you must kill all you can.  And if you cannot
Title:  kill them all at once, you must wing them, so that they can be
Title:  afterwards killed at your leisure.  Hence it is, that at times like
Title:  these the drugg, comes into requisition.  Our boat was furnished with
Title:  three of them.  The first and second were successfully darted, and we
Title:  saw the whales staggeringly running off, fettered by the enormous
Title:  sidelong resistance of the towing drugg.  They were cramped like
Title:  malefactors with the chain and ball.  But upon flinging the third, in
Title:  the act of tossing overboard the clumsy wooden block, it caught under
Title:  one of the seats of the boat, and in an instant tore it out and
Title:  carried it away, dropping the oarsman in the boat's bottom as the
Title:  seat slid from under him.  On both sides the sea came in at the
Title:  wounded planks, but we stuffed two or three drawers and shirts in,
Title:  and so stopped the leaks for the time.
Title:  
Title:  It had been next to impossible to dart these drugged-harpoons, were
Title:  it not that as we advanced into the herd, our whale's way greatly
Title:  diminished; moreover, that as we went still further and further from
Title:  the circumference of commotion, the direful disorders seemed waning.
Title:  So that when at last the jerking harpoon drew out, and the towing
Title:  whale sideways vanished; then, with the tapering force of his parting
Title:  momentum, we glided between two whales into the innermost heart of
Title:  the shoal, as if from some mountain torrent we had slid into a serene
Title:  valley lake.  Here the storms in the roaring glens between the
Title:  outermost whales, were heard but not felt.  In this central expanse
Title:  the sea presented that smooth satin-like surface, called a sleek,
Title:  produced by the subtle moisture thrown off by the whale in his more
Title:  quiet moods.  Yes, we were now in that enchanted calm which they say
Title:  lurks at the heart of every commotion.  And still in the distracted
Title:  distance we beheld the tumults of the outer concentric circles, and
Title:  saw successive pods of whales, eight or ten in each, swiftly going
Title:  round and round, like multiplied spans of horses in a ring; and so
Title:  closely shoulder to shoulder, that a Titanic circus-rider might
Title:  easily have over-arched the middle ones, and so have gone round on
Title:  their backs.  Owing to the density of the crowd of reposing whales,
Title:  more immediately surrounding the embayed axis of the herd, no
Title:  possible chance of escape was at present afforded us.  We must watch
Title:  for a breach in the living wall that hemmed us in; the wall that had
Title:  only admitted us in order to shut us up.  Keeping at the centre of
Title:  the lake, we were occasionally visited by small tame cows and calves;
Title:  the women and children of this routed host.
Title:  
Title:  Now, inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between the revolving
Title:  outer circles, and inclusive of the spaces between the various pods
Title:  in any one of those circles, the entire area at this juncture,
Title:  embraced by the whole multitude, must have contained at least two or
Title:  three square miles.  At any rate--though indeed such a test at such a
Title:  time might be deceptive--spoutings might be discovered from our low
Title:  boat that seemed playing up almost from the rim of the horizon.  I
Title:  mention this circumstance, because, as if the cows and calves had
Title:  been purposely locked up in this innermost fold; and as if the wide
Title:  extent of the herd had hitherto prevented them from learning the
Title:  precise cause of its stopping; or, possibly, being so young,
Title:  unsophisticated, and every way innocent and inexperienced; however it
Title:  may have been, these smaller whales--now and then visiting our
Title:  becalmed boat from the margin of the lake--evinced a wondrous
Title:  fearlessness and confidence, or else a still becharmed panic which it
Title:  was impossible not to marvel at.  Like household dogs they came
Title:  snuffling round us, right up to our gunwales, and touching them; till
Title:  it almost seemed that some spell had suddenly domesticated them.
Title:  Queequeg patted their foreheads; Starbuck scratched their backs with
Title:  his lance; but fearful of the consequences, for the time refrained
Title:  from darting it.
Title:  
Title:  But far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface, another and
Title:  still stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side.  For,
Title:  suspended in those watery vaults, floated the forms of the nursing
Title:  mothers of the whales, and those that by their enormous girth seemed
Title:  shortly to become mothers.  The lake, as I have hinted, was to a
Title:  considerable depth exceedingly transparent; and as human infants
Title:  while suckling will calmly and fixedly gaze away from the breast, as
Title:  if leading two different lives at the time; and while yet drawing
Title:  mortal nourishment, be still spiritually feasting upon some unearthly
Title:  reminiscence;--even so did the young of these whales seem looking up
Title:  towards us, but not at us, as if we were but a bit of Gulfweed in
Title:  their new-born sight.  Floating on their sides, the mothers also
Title:  seemed quietly eyeing us.  One of these little infants, that from
Title:  certain queer tokens seemed hardly a day old, might have measured
Title:  some fourteen feet in length, and some six feet in girth.  He was a
Title:  little frisky; though as yet his body seemed scarce yet recovered
Title:  from that irksome position it had so lately occupied in the maternal
Title:  reticule; where, tail to head, and all ready for the final spring,
Title:  the unborn whale lies bent like a Tartar's bow.  The delicate
Title:  side-fins, and the palms of his flukes, still freshly retained the
Title:  plaited crumpled appearance of a baby's ears newly arrived from
Title:  foreign parts.
Title:  
Title:  "Line! line!" cried Queequeg, looking over the gunwale; "him fast!
Title:  him fast!--Who line him!  Who struck?--Two whale; one big, one
Title:  little!"
Title:  
Title:  "What ails ye, man?" cried Starbuck.
Title:  
Title:  "Look-e here," said Queequeg, pointing down.
Title:  
Title:  As when the stricken whale, that from the tub has reeled out hundreds
Title:  of fathoms of rope; as, after deep sounding, he floats up again, and
Title:  shows the slackened curling line buoyantly rising and spiralling
Title:  towards the air; so now, Starbuck saw long coils of the umbilical
Title:  cord of Madame Leviathan, by which the young cub seemed still
Title:  tethered to its dam.  Not seldom in the rapid vicissitudes of the
Title:  chase, this natural line, with the maternal end loose, becomes
Title:  entangled with the hempen one, so that the cub is thereby trapped.
Title:  Some of the subtlest secrets of the seas seemed divulged to us in
Title:  this enchanted pond.  We saw young Leviathan amours in the deep.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *The sperm whale, as with all other species of the Leviathan, but
Title:  unlike most other fish, breeds indifferently at all seasons; after a
Title:  gestation which may probably be set down at nine months, producing
Title:  but one at a time; though in some few known instances giving birth to
Title:  an Esau and Jacob:--a contingency provided for in suckling by two
Title:  teats, curiously situated, one on each side of the anus; but the
Title:  breasts themselves extend upwards from that.  When by chance these
Title:  precious parts in a nursing whale are cut by the hunter's lance, the
Title:  mother's pouring milk and blood rivallingly discolour the sea for
Title:  rods.  The milk is very sweet and rich; it has been tasted by man; it
Title:  might do well with strawberries.  When overflowing with mutual
Title:  esteem, the whales salute MORE HOMINUM.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternations
Title:  and affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freely
Title:  and fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yea, serenely
Title:  revelled in dalliance and delight.  But even so, amid the tornadoed
Title:  Atlantic of my being, do I myself still for ever centrally disport in
Title:  mute calm; and while ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve round
Title:  me, deep down and deep inland there I still bathe me in eternal
Title:  mildness of joy.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, as we thus lay entranced, the occasional sudden frantic
Title:  spectacles in the distance evinced the activity of the other boats,
Title:  still engaged in drugging the whales on the frontier of the host; or
Title:  possibly carrying on the war within the first circle, where abundance
Title:  of room and some convenient retreats were afforded them.  But the
Title:  sight of the enraged drugged whales now and then blindly darting to
Title:  and fro across the circles, was nothing to what at last met our eyes.
Title:  It is sometimes the custom when fast to a whale more than commonly
Title:  powerful and alert, to seek to hamstring him, as it were, by
Title:  sundering or maiming his gigantic tail-tendon.  It is done by darting
Title:  a short-handled cutting-spade, to which is attached a rope for
Title:  hauling it back again.  A whale wounded (as we afterwards learned) in
Title:  this part, but not effectually, as it seemed, had broken away from
Title:  the boat, carrying along with him half of the harpoon line; and in
Title:  the extraordinary agony of the wound, he was now dashing among the
Title:  revolving circles like the lone mounted desperado Arnold, at the
Title:  battle of Saratoga, carrying dismay wherever he went.
Title:  
Title:  But agonizing as was the wound of this whale, and an appalling
Title:  spectacle enough, any way; yet the peculiar horror with which he
Title:  seemed to inspire the rest of the herd, was owing to a cause which at
Title:  first the intervening distance obscured from us.  But at length we
Title:  perceived that by one of the unimaginable accidents of the fishery,
Title:  this whale had become entangled in the harpoon-line that he towed; he
Title:  had also run away with the cutting-spade in him; and while the free
Title:  end of the rope attached to that weapon, had permanently caught in
Title:  the coils of the harpoon-line round his tail, the cutting-spade
Title:  itself had worked loose from his flesh.  So that tormented to
Title:  madness, he was now churning through the water, violently flailing
Title:  with his flexible tail, and tossing the keen spade about him,
Title:  wounding and murdering his own comrades.
Title:  
Title:  This terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from their
Title:  stationary fright.  First, the whales forming the margin of our lake
Title:  began to crowd a little, and tumble against each other, as if lifted
Title:  by half spent billows from afar; then the lake itself began faintly
Title:  to heave and swell; the submarine bridal-chambers and nurseries
Title:  vanished; in more and more contracting orbits the whales in the more
Title:  central circles began to swim in thickening clusters.  Yes, the long
Title:  calm was departing.  A low advancing hum was soon heard; and then
Title:  like to the tumultuous masses of block-ice when the great river
Title:  Hudson breaks up in Spring, the entire host of whales came tumbling
Title:  upon their inner centre, as if to pile themselves up in one common
Title:  mountain.  Instantly Starbuck and Queequeg changed places; Starbuck
Title:  taking the stern.
Title:  
Title:  "Oars!  Oars!" he intensely whispered, seizing the helm--"gripe your
Title:  oars, and clutch your souls, now!  My God, men, stand by!  Shove him
Title:  off, you Queequeg--the whale there!--prick him!--hit him!  Stand
Title:  up--stand up, and stay so!  Spring, men--pull, men; never mind their
Title:  backs--scrape them!--scrape away!"
Title:  
Title:  The boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks, leaving
Title:  a narrow Dardanelles between their long lengths.  But by desperate
Title:  endeavor we at last shot into a temporary opening; then giving way
Title:  rapidly, and at the same time earnestly watching for another outlet.
Title:  After many similar hair-breadth escapes, we at last swiftly glided
Title:  into what had just been one of the outer circles, but now crossed by
Title:  random whales, all violently making for one centre.  This lucky
Title:  salvation was cheaply purchased by the loss of Queequeg's hat, who,
Title:  while standing in the bows to prick the fugitive whales, had his hat
Title:  taken clean from his head by the air-eddy made by the sudden tossing
Title:  of a pair of broad flukes close by.
Title:  
Title:  Riotous and disordered as the universal commotion now was, it soon
Title:  resolved itself into what seemed a systematic movement; for having
Title:  clumped together at last in one dense body, they then renewed their
Title:  onward flight with augmented fleetness.  Further pursuit was useless;
Title:  but the boats still lingered in their wake to pick up what drugged
Title:  whales might be dropped astern, and likewise to secure one which
Title:  Flask had killed and waifed.  The waif is a pennoned pole, two or
Title:  three of which are carried by every boat; and which, when additional
Title:  game is at hand, are inserted upright into the floating body of a
Title:  dead whale, both to mark its place on the sea, and also as token of
Title:  prior possession, should the boats of any other ship draw near.
Title:  
Title:  The result of this lowering was somewhat illustrative of that
Title:  sagacious saying in the Fishery,--the more whales the less fish.  Of
Title:  all the drugged whales only one was captured.  The rest contrived to
Title:  escape for the time, but only to be taken, as will hereafter be seen,
Title:  by some other craft than the Pequod.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 88
Title:  
Title:  Schools and Schoolmasters.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The previous chapter gave account of an immense body or herd of Sperm
Title:  Whales, and there was also then given the probable cause inducing
Title:  those vast aggregations.
Title:  
Title:  Now, though such great bodies are at times encountered, yet, as must
Title:  have been seen, even at the present day, small detached bands are
Title:  occasionally observed, embracing from twenty to fifty individuals
Title:  each.  Such bands are known as schools.  They generally are of two
Title:  sorts; those composed almost entirely of females, and those mustering
Title:  none but young vigorous males, or bulls, as they are familiarly
Title:  designated.
Title:  
Title:  In cavalier attendance upon the school of females, you invariably see
Title:  a male of full grown magnitude, but not old; who, upon any alarm,
Title:  evinces his gallantry by falling in the rear and covering the flight
Title:  of his ladies.  In truth, this gentleman is a luxurious Ottoman,
Title:  swimming about over the watery world, surroundingly accompanied by
Title:  all the solaces and endearments of the harem.  The contrast between
Title:  this Ottoman and his concubines is striking; because, while he is
Title:  always of the largest leviathanic proportions, the ladies, even at
Title:  full growth, are not more than one-third of the bulk of an
Title:  average-sized male.  They are comparatively delicate, indeed; I dare
Title:  say, not to exceed half a dozen yards round the waist.  Nevertheless,
Title:  it cannot be denied, that upon the whole they are hereditarily
Title:  entitled to EMBONPOINT.
Title:  
Title:  It is very curious to watch this harem and its lord in their indolent
Title:  ramblings.  Like fashionables, they are for ever on the move in
Title:  leisurely search of variety.  You meet them on the Line in time for
Title:  the full flower of the Equatorial feeding season, having just
Title:  returned, perhaps, from spending the summer in the Northern seas, and
Title:  so cheating summer of all unpleasant weariness and warmth.  By the
Title:  time they have lounged up and down the promenade of the Equator
Title:  awhile, they start for the Oriental waters in anticipation of the
Title:  cool season there, and so evade the other excessive temperature of
Title:  the year.
Title:  
Title:  When serenely advancing on one of these journeys, if any strange
Title:  suspicious sights are seen, my lord whale keeps a wary eye on his
Title:  interesting family.  Should any unwarrantably pert young Leviathan
Title:  coming that way, presume to draw confidentially close to one of the
Title:  ladies, with what prodigious fury the Bashaw assails him, and chases
Title:  him away!  High times, indeed, if unprincipled young rakes like him
Title:  are to be permitted to invade the sanctity of domestic bliss; though
Title:  do what the Bashaw will, he cannot keep the most notorious Lothario
Title:  out of his bed; for, alas! all fish bed in common.  As ashore, the
Title:  ladies often cause the most terrible duels among their rival
Title:  admirers; just so with the whales, who sometimes come to deadly
Title:  battle, and all for love.  They fence with their long lower jaws,
Title:  sometimes locking them together, and so striving for the supremacy
Title:  like elks that warringly interweave their antlers.  Not a few are
Title:  captured having the deep scars of these encounters,--furrowed heads,
Title:  broken teeth, scolloped fins; and in some instances, wrenched and
Title:  dislocated mouths.
Title:  
Title:  But supposing the invader of domestic bliss to betake himself away at
Title:  the first rush of the harem's lord, then is it very diverting to
Title:  watch that lord.  Gently he insinuates his vast bulk among them again
Title:  and revels there awhile, still in tantalizing vicinity to young
Title:  Lothario, like pious Solomon devoutly worshipping among his thousand
Title:  concubines.  Granting other whales to be in sight, the fishermen
Title:  will seldom give chase to one of these Grand Turks; for these Grand
Title:  Turks are too lavish of their strength, and hence their unctuousness
Title:  is small.  As for the sons and the daughters they beget, why, those sons
Title:  and daughters must take care of themselves; at least, with only the
Title:  maternal help.  For like certain other omnivorous roving lovers that
Title:  might be named, my Lord Whale has no taste for the nursery, however
Title:  much for the bower; and so, being a great traveller, he leaves his
Title:  anonymous babies all over the world; every baby an exotic.  In good
Title:  time, nevertheless, as the ardour of youth declines; as years and
Title:  dumps increase; as reflection lends her solemn pauses; in short, as a
Title:  general lassitude overtakes the sated Turk; then a love of ease and
Title:  virtue supplants the love for maidens; our Ottoman enters upon the
Title:  impotent, repentant, admonitory stage of life, forswears, disbands
Title:  the harem, and grown to an exemplary, sulky old soul, goes about all
Title:  alone among the meridians and parallels saying his prayers, and
Title:  warning each young Leviathan from his amorous errors.
Title:  
Title:  Now, as the harem of whales is called by the fishermen a school, so
Title:  is the lord and master of that school technically known as the
Title:  schoolmaster.  It is therefore not in strict character, however
Title:  admirably satirical, that after going to school himself, he should
Title:  then go abroad inculcating not what he learned there, but the folly
Title:  of it.  His title, schoolmaster, would very naturally seem derived
Title:  from the name bestowed upon the harem itself, but some have surmised
Title:  that the man who first thus entitled this sort of Ottoman whale, must
Title:  have read the memoirs of Vidocq, and informed himself what sort of a
Title:  country-schoolmaster that famous Frenchman was in his younger days,
Title:  and what was the nature of those occult lessons he inculcated into
Title:  some of his pupils.
Title:  
Title:  The same secludedness and isolation to which the schoolmaster whale
Title:  betakes himself in his advancing years, is true of all aged Sperm
Title:  Whales.  Almost universally, a lone whale--as a solitary Leviathan is
Title:  called--proves an ancient one.  Like venerable moss-bearded Daniel
Title:  Boone, he will have no one near him but Nature herself; and her he
Title:  takes to wife in the wilderness of waters, and the best of wives she
Title:  is, though she keeps so many moody secrets.
Title:  
Title:  The schools composing none but young and vigorous males, previously
Title:  mentioned, offer a strong contrast to the harem schools.  For while
Title:  those female whales are characteristically timid, the young males, or
Title:  forty-barrel-bulls, as they call them, are by far the most pugnacious
Title:  of all Leviathans, and proverbially the most dangerous to encounter;
Title:  excepting those wondrous grey-headed, grizzled whales, sometimes met,
Title:  and these will fight you like grim fiends exasperated by a penal
Title:  gout.
Title:  
Title:  The Forty-barrel-bull schools are larger than the harem schools.
Title:  Like a mob of young collegians, they are full of fight, fun, and
Title:  wickedness, tumbling round the world at such a reckless, rollicking
Title:  rate, that no prudent underwriter would insure them any more than he
Title:  would a riotous lad at Yale or Harvard.  They soon relinquish this
Title:  turbulence though, and when about three-fourths grown, break up, and
Title:  separately go about in quest of settlements, that is, harems.
Title:  
Title:  Another point of difference between the male and female schools is
Title:  still more characteristic of the sexes.  Say you strike a
Title:  Forty-barrel-bull--poor devil! all his comrades quit him.  But strike
Title:  a member of the harem school, and her companions swim around her with
Title:  every token of concern, sometimes lingering so near her and so long,
Title:  as themselves to fall a prey.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 89
Title:  
Title:  Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The allusion to the waif and waif-poles in the last chapter but one,
Title:  necessitates some account of the laws and regulations of the whale
Title:  fishery, of which the waif may be deemed the grand symbol and badge.
Title:  
Title:  It frequently happens that when several ships are cruising in
Title:  company, a whale may be struck by one vessel, then escape, and be
Title:  finally killed and captured by another vessel; and herein are
Title:  indirectly comprised many minor contingencies, all partaking of this
Title:  one grand feature.  For example,--after a weary and perilous chase
Title:  and capture of a whale, the body may get loose from the ship by
Title:  reason of a violent storm; and drifting far away to leeward, be
Title:  retaken by a second whaler, who, in a calm, snugly tows it alongside,
Title:  without risk of life or line.  Thus the most vexatious and violent
Title:  disputes would often arise between the fishermen, were there not some
Title:  written or unwritten, universal, undisputed law applicable to all
Title:  cases.
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps the only formal whaling code authorized by legislative
Title:  enactment, was that of Holland.  It was decreed by the States-General
Title:  in A.D. 1695.  But though no other nation has ever had any written
Title:  whaling law, yet the American fishermen have been their own
Title:  legislators and lawyers in this matter.  They have provided a system
Title:  which for terse comprehensiveness surpasses Justinian's Pandects and
Title:  the By-laws of the Chinese Society for the Suppression of Meddling
Title:  with other People's Business.  Yes; these laws might be engraven on a
Title:  Queen Anne's forthing, or the barb of a harpoon, and worn round the
Title:  neck, so small are they.
Title:  
Title:  I.  A Fast-Fish belongs to the party fast to it.
Title:  
Title:  II.  A Loose-Fish is fair game for anybody who can soonest catch it.
Title:  
Title:  But what plays the mischief with this masterly code is the admirable
Title:  brevity of it, which necessitates a vast volume of commentaries to
Title:  expound it.
Title:  
Title:  First: What is a Fast-Fish?  Alive or dead a fish is technically
Title:  fast, when it is connected with an occupied ship or boat, by any
Title:  medium at all controllable by the occupant or occupants,--a mast, an
Title:  oar, a nine-inch cable, a telegraph wire, or a strand of cobweb, it
Title:  is all the same.  Likewise a fish is technically fast when it bears a
Title:  waif, or any other recognised symbol of possession; so long as the
Title:  party waifing it plainly evince their ability at any time to take it
Title:  alongside, as well as their intention so to do.
Title:  
Title:  These are scientific commentaries; but the commentaries of the
Title:  whalemen themselves sometimes consist in hard words and harder
Title:  knocks--the Coke-upon-Littleton of the fist.  True, among the more
Title:  upright and honourable whalemen allowances are always made for
Title:  peculiar cases, where it would be an outrageous moral injustice for
Title:  one party to claim possession of a whale previously chased or killed
Title:  by another party.  But others are by no means so scrupulous.
Title:  
Title:  Some fifty years ago there was a curious case of whale-trover
Title:  litigated in England, wherein the plaintiffs set forth that after a
Title:  hard chase of a whale in the Northern seas; and when indeed they (the
Title:  plaintiffs) had succeeded in harpooning the fish; they were at last,
Title:  through peril of their lives, obliged to forsake not only their
Title:  lines, but their boat itself.  Ultimately the defendants (the crew of
Title:  another ship) came up with the whale, struck, killed, seized, and
Title:  finally appropriated it before the very eyes of the plaintiffs.  And
Title:  when those defendants were remonstrated with, their captain snapped
Title:  his fingers in the plaintiffs' teeth, and assured them that by way of
Title:  doxology to the deed he had done, he would now retain their line,
Title:  harpoons, and boat, which had remained attached to the whale at the
Title:  time of the seizure.  Wherefore the plaintiffs now sued for the
Title:  recovery of the value of their whale, line, harpoons, and boat.
Title:  
Title:  Mr. Erskine was counsel for the defendants; Lord Ellenborough was the
Title:  judge.  In the course of the defence, the witty Erskine went on to
Title:  illustrate his position, by alluding to a recent crim. con. case,
Title:  wherein a gentleman, after in vain trying to bridle his wife's
Title:  viciousness, had at last abandoned her upon the seas of life; but in
Title:  the course of years, repenting of that step, he instituted an action
Title:  to recover possession of her.  Erskine was on the other side; and he
Title:  then supported it by saying, that though the gentleman had originally
Title:  harpooned the lady, and had once had her fast, and only by reason of
Title:  the great stress of her plunging viciousness, had at last abandoned
Title:  her; yet abandon her he did, so that she became a loose-fish; and
Title:  therefore when a subsequent gentleman re-harpooned her, the lady then
Title:  became that subsequent gentleman's property, along with whatever
Title:  harpoon might have been found sticking in her.
Title:  
Title:  Now in the present case Erskine contended that the examples of the
Title:  whale and the lady were reciprocally illustrative of each other.
Title:  
Title:  These pleadings, and the counter pleadings, being duly heard, the
Title:  very learned Judge in set terms decided, to wit,--That as for the
Title:  boat, he awarded it to the plaintiffs, because they had merely
Title:  abandoned it to save their lives; but that with regard to the
Title:  controverted whale, harpoons, and line, they belonged to the
Title:  defendants; the whale, because it was a Loose-Fish at the time of the
Title:  final capture; and the harpoons and line because when the fish made
Title:  off with them, it (the fish) acquired a property in those articles;
Title:  and hence anybody who afterwards took the fish had a right to them.
Title:  Now the defendants afterwards took the fish; ergo, the aforesaid
Title:  articles were theirs.
Title:  
Title:  A common man looking at this decision of the very learned Judge,
Title:  might possibly object to it.  But ploughed up to the primary rock of
Title:  the matter, the two great principles laid down in the twin whaling
Title:  laws previously quoted, and applied and elucidated by Lord
Title:  Ellenborough in the above cited case; these two laws touching
Title:  Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish, I say, will, on reflection, be found the
Title:  fundamentals of all human jurisprudence; for notwithstanding its
Title:  complicated tracery of sculpture, the Temple of the Law, like the
Title:  Temple of the Philistines, has but two props to stand on.
Title:  
Title:  Is it not a saying in every one's mouth, Possession is half of the
Title:  law: that is, regardless of how the thing came into possession?  But
Title:  often possession is the whole of the law.  What are the sinews and
Title:  souls of Russian serfs and Republican slaves but Fast-Fish, whereof
Title:  possession is the whole of the law?  What to the rapacious landlord
Title:  is the widow's last mite but a Fast-Fish?  What is yonder undetected
Title:  villain's marble mansion with a door-plate for a waif; what is that
Title:  but a Fast-Fish?  What is the ruinous discount which Mordecai, the
Title:  broker, gets from poor Woebegone, the bankrupt, on a loan to
Title:  keep Woebegone's family from starvation; what is that ruinous
Title:  discount but a Fast-Fish?  What is the Archbishop of Savesoul's
Title:  income of L100,000 seized from the scant bread and cheese of
Title:  hundreds of thousands of broken-backed laborers (all sure of heaven
Title:  without any of Savesoul's help) what is that globular L100,000 but a
Title:  Fast-Fish?  What are the Duke of Dunder's hereditary towns and
Title:  hamlets but Fast-Fish?  What to that redoubted harpooneer, John Bull,
Title:  is poor Ireland, but a Fast-Fish?  What to that apostolic lancer,
Title:  Brother Jonathan, is Texas but a Fast-Fish?  And concerning all
Title:  these, is not Possession the whole of the law?
Title:  
Title:  But if the doctrine of Fast-Fish be pretty generally applicable, the
Title:  kindred doctrine of Loose-Fish is still more widely so.  That is
Title:  internationally and universally applicable.
Title:  
Title:  What was America in 1492 but a Loose-Fish, in which Columbus struck
Title:  the Spanish standard by way of waifing it for his royal master and
Title:  mistress?  What was Poland to the Czar?  What Greece to the Turk?
Title:  What India to England?  What at last will Mexico be to the United
Title:  States?  All Loose-Fish.
Title:  
Title:  What are the Rights of Man and the Liberties of the World but
Title:  Loose-Fish?  What all men's minds and opinions but Loose-Fish?  What
Title:  is the principle of religious belief in them but a Loose-Fish?  What
Title:  to the ostentatious smuggling verbalists are the thoughts of thinkers
Title:  but Loose-Fish?  What is the great globe itself but a Loose-Fish?
Title:  And what are you, reader, but a Loose-Fish and a Fast-Fish, too?
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 90
Title:  
Title:  Heads or Tails.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "De balena vero sufficit, si rex habeat caput, et regina caudam."
Title:  BRACTON, L. 3, C. 3.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Latin from the books of the Laws of England, which taken along with
Title:  the context, means, that of all whales captured by anybody on the
Title:  coast of that land, the King, as Honourary Grand Harpooneer, must have
Title:  the head, and the Queen be respectfully presented with the tail.  A
Title:  division which, in the whale, is much like halving an apple; there is
Title:  no intermediate remainder.  Now as this law, under a modified form,
Title:  is to this day in force in England; and as it offers in various
Title:  respects a strange anomaly touching the general law of Fast and
Title:  Loose-Fish, it is here treated of in a separate chapter, on the same
Title:  courteous principle that prompts the English railways to be at the
Title:  expense of a separate car, specially reserved for the accommodation
Title:  of royalty.  In the first place, in curious proof of the fact that
Title:  the above-mentioned law is still in force, I proceed to lay before
Title:  you a circumstance that happened within the last two years.
Title:  
Title:  It seems that some honest mariners of Dover, or Sandwich, or some one
Title:  of the Cinque Ports, had after a hard chase succeeded in killing and
Title:  beaching a fine whale which they had originally descried afar off
Title:  from the shore.  Now the Cinque Ports are partially or somehow under
Title:  the jurisdiction of a sort of policeman or beadle, called a Lord
Title:  Warden.  Holding the office directly from the crown, I believe, all
Title:  the royal emoluments incident to the Cinque Port territories become
Title:  by assignment his.  By some writers this office is called a sinecure.
Title:  But not so.  Because the Lord Warden is busily employed at times in
Title:  fobbing his perquisites; which are his chiefly by virtue of that same
Title:  fobbing of them.
Title:  
Title:  Now when these poor sun-burnt mariners, bare-footed, and with their
Title:  trowsers rolled high up on their eely legs, had wearily hauled their
Title:  fat fish high and dry, promising themselves a good L150 from the
Title:  precious oil and bone; and in fantasy sipping rare tea with their
Title:  wives, and good ale with their cronies, upon the strength of their
Title:  respective shares; up steps a very learned and most Christian and
Title:  charitable gentleman, with a copy of Blackstone under his arm; and
Title:  laying it upon the whale's head, he says--"Hands off! this fish, my
Title:  masters, is a Fast-Fish.  I seize it as the Lord Warden's."  Upon
Title:  this the poor mariners in their respectful consternation--so truly
Title:  English--knowing not what to say, fall to vigorously scratching their
Title:  heads all round; meanwhile ruefully glancing from the whale to the
Title:  stranger.  But that did in nowise mend the matter, or at all soften
Title:  the hard heart of the learned gentleman with the copy of Blackstone.
Title:  At length one of them, after long scratching about for his ideas,
Title:  made bold to speak,
Title:  
Title:  "Please, sir, who is the Lord Warden?"
Title:  
Title:  "The Duke."
Title:  
Title:  "But the duke had nothing to do with taking this fish?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is his."
Title:  
Title:  "We have been at great trouble, and peril, and some expense, and is
Title:  all that to go to the Duke's benefit; we getting nothing at all for
Title:  our pains but our blisters?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is his."
Title:  
Title:  "Is the Duke so very poor as to be forced to this desperate mode of
Title:  getting a livelihood?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is his."
Title:  
Title:  "I thought to relieve my old bed-ridden mother by part of my share of
Title:  this whale."
Title:  
Title:  "It is his."
Title:  
Title:  "Won't the Duke be content with a quarter or a half?"
Title:  
Title:  "It is his."
Title:  
Title:  In a word, the whale was seized and sold, and his Grace the Duke of
Title:  Wellington received the money.  Thinking that viewed in some
Title:  particular lights, the case might by a bare possibility in some small
Title:  degree be deemed, under the circumstances, a rather hard one, an
Title:  honest clergyman of the town respectfully addressed a note to his
Title:  Grace, begging him to take the case of those unfortunate mariners
Title:  into full consideration.  To which my Lord Duke in substance replied
Title:  (both letters were published) that he had already done so, and
Title:  received the money, and would be obliged to the reverend gentleman if
Title:  for the future he (the reverend gentleman) would decline meddling
Title:  with other people's business.  Is this the still militant old man,
Title:  standing at the corners of the three kingdoms, on all hands coercing
Title:  alms of beggars?
Title:  
Title:  It will readily be seen that in this case the alleged right of the
Title:  Duke to the whale was a delegated one from the Sovereign.  We must
Title:  needs inquire then on what principle the Sovereign is originally
Title:  invested with that right.  The law itself has already been set forth.
Title:  But Plowdon gives us the reason for it.  Says Plowdon, the whale so
Title:  caught belongs to the King and Queen, "because of its superior
Title:  excellence."  And by the soundest commentators this has ever been
Title:  held a cogent argument in such matters.
Title:  
Title:  But why should the King have the head, and the Queen the tail?  A
Title:  reason for that, ye lawyers!
Title:  
Title:  In his treatise on "Queen-Gold," or Queen-pinmoney, an old King's
Title:  Bench author, one William Prynne, thus discourseth: "Ye tail is ye
Title:  Queen's, that ye Queen's wardrobe may be supplied with ye whalebone."
Title:  Now this was written at a time when the black limber bone of the
Title:  Greenland or Right whale was largely used in ladies' bodices.  But
Title:  this same bone is not in the tail; it is in the head, which is a sad
Title:  mistake for a sagacious lawyer like Prynne.  But is the Queen a
Title:  mermaid, to be presented with a tail?  An allegorical meaning may
Title:  lurk here.
Title:  
Title:  There are two royal fish so styled by the English law writers--the
Title:  whale and the sturgeon; both royal property under certain
Title:  limitations, and nominally supplying the tenth branch of the crown's
Title:  ordinary revenue.  I know not that any other author has hinted of the
Title:  matter; but by inference it seems to me that the sturgeon must be
Title:  divided in the same way as the whale, the King receiving the highly
Title:  dense and elastic head peculiar to that fish, which, symbolically
Title:  regarded, may possibly be humorously grounded upon some presumed
Title:  congeniality.  And thus there seems a reason in all things, even in
Title:  law.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 91
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod Meets The Rose-Bud.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "In vain it was to rake for Ambergriese in the paunch of this
Title:  Leviathan, insufferable fetor denying not inquiry."
Title:  SIR T. BROWNE, V.E.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was a week or two after the last whaling scene recounted, and when
Title:  we were slowly sailing over a sleepy, vapoury, mid-day sea, that the
Title:  many noses on the Pequod's deck proved more vigilant discoverers than
Title:  the three pairs of eyes aloft.  A peculiar and not very pleasant
Title:  smell was smelt in the sea.
Title:  
Title:  "I will bet something now," said Stubb, "that somewhere hereabouts
Title:  are some of those drugged whales we tickled the other day.  I thought
Title:  they would keel up before long."
Title:  
Title:  Presently, the vapours in advance slid aside; and there in the
Title:  distance lay a ship, whose furled sails betokened that some sort of
Title:  whale must be alongside.  As we glided nearer, the stranger showed
Title:  French colours from his peak; and by the eddying cloud of vulture
Title:  sea-fowl that circled, and hovered, and swooped around him, it was
Title:  plain that the whale alongside must be what the fishermen call a
Title:  blasted whale, that is, a whale that has died unmolested on the sea,
Title:  and so floated an unappropriated corpse.  It may well be conceived,
Title:  what an unsavory odor such a mass must exhale; worse than an Assyrian
Title:  city in the plague, when the living are incompetent to bury the
Title:  departed.  So intolerable indeed is it regarded by some, that no
Title:  cupidity could persuade them to moor alongside of it.  Yet are there
Title:  those who will still do it; notwithstanding the fact that the oil
Title:  obtained from such subjects is of a very inferior quality, and by no
Title:  means of the nature of attar-of-rose.
Title:  
Title:  Coming still nearer with the expiring breeze, we saw that the
Title:  Frenchman had a second whale alongside; and this second whale seemed
Title:  even more of a nosegay than the first.  In truth, it turned out to be
Title:  one of those problematical whales that seem to dry up and die with a
Title:  sort of prodigious dyspepsia, or indigestion; leaving their defunct
Title:  bodies almost entirely bankrupt of anything like oil.  Nevertheless,
Title:  in the proper place we shall see that no knowing fisherman will ever
Title:  turn up his nose at such a whale as this, however much he may shun
Title:  blasted whales in general.
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod had now swept so nigh to the stranger, that Stubb vowed he
Title:  recognised his cutting spade-pole entangled in the lines that were
Title:  knotted round the tail of one of these whales.
Title:  
Title:  "There's a pretty fellow, now," he banteringly laughed, standing in
Title:  the ship's bows, "there's a jackal for ye!  I well know that these
Title:  Crappoes of Frenchmen are but poor devils in the fishery; sometimes
Title:  lowering their boats for breakers, mistaking them for Sperm Whale
Title:  spouts; yes, and sometimes sailing from their port with their hold
Title:  full of boxes of tallow candles, and cases of snuffers, foreseeing
Title:  that all the oil they will get won't be enough to dip the Captain's
Title:  wick into; aye, we all know these things; but look ye, here's a
Title:  Crappo that is content with our leavings, the drugged whale there, I
Title:  mean; aye, and is content too with scraping the dry bones of that
Title:  other precious fish he has there.  Poor devil!  I say, pass round a
Title:  hat, some one, and let's make him a present of a little oil for dear
Title:  charity's sake.  For what oil he'll get from that drugged whale
Title:  there, wouldn't be fit to burn in a jail; no, not in a condemned
Title:  cell.  And as for the other whale, why, I'll agree to get more oil by
Title:  chopping up and trying out these three masts of ours, than he'll get
Title:  from that bundle of bones; though, now that I think of it, it may
Title:  contain something worth a good deal more than oil; yes, ambergris.  I
Title:  wonder now if our old man has thought of that.  It's worth trying.
Title:  Yes, I'm for it;" and so saying he started for the quarter-deck.
Title:  
Title:  By this time the faint air had become a complete calm; so that
Title:  whether or no, the Pequod was now fairly entrapped in the smell, with
Title:  no hope of escaping except by its breezing up again.  Issuing from
Title:  the cabin, Stubb now called his boat's crew, and pulled off for the
Title:  stranger.  Drawing across her bow, he perceived that in accordance
Title:  with the fanciful French taste, the upper part of her stem-piece was
Title:  carved in the likeness of a huge drooping stalk, was painted green,
Title:  and for thorns had copper spikes projecting from it here and there;
Title:  the whole terminating in a symmetrical folded bulb of a bright red
Title:  colour.  Upon her head boards, in large gilt letters, he read "Bouton
Title:  de Rose,"--Rose-button, or Rose-bud; and this was the romantic name
Title:  of this aromatic ship.
Title:  
Title:  Though Stubb did not understand the BOUTON part of the inscription,
Title:  yet the word ROSE, and the bulbous figure-head put together,
Title:  sufficiently explained the whole to him.
Title:  
Title:  "A wooden rose-bud, eh?" he cried with his hand to his nose, "that
Title:  will do very well; but how like all creation it smells!"
Title:  
Title:  Now in order to hold direct communication with the people on deck, he
Title:  had to pull round the bows to the starboard side, and thus come close
Title:  to the blasted whale; and so talk over it.
Title:  
Title:  Arrived then at this spot, with one hand still to his nose, he
Title:  bawled--"Bouton-de-Rose, ahoy! are there any of you Bouton-de-Roses
Title:  that speak English?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes," rejoined a Guernsey-man from the bulwarks, who turned out to
Title:  be the chief-mate.
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then, my Bouton-de-Rose-bud, have you seen the White Whale?"
Title:  
Title:  "WHAT whale?"
Title:  
Title:  "The WHITE Whale--a Sperm Whale--Moby Dick, have ye seen him?
Title:  
Title:  "Never heard of such a whale.  Cachalot Blanche!  White Whale--no."
Title:  
Title:  "Very good, then; good bye now, and I'll call again in a minute."
Title:  
Title:  Then rapidly pulling back towards the Pequod, and seeing Ahab leaning
Title:  over the quarter-deck rail awaiting his report, he moulded his two
Title:  hands into a trumpet and shouted--"No, Sir!  No!"  Upon which Ahab
Title:  retired, and Stubb returned to the Frenchman.
Title:  
Title:  He now perceived that the Guernsey-man, who had just got into the
Title:  chains, and was using a cutting-spade, had slung his nose in a sort
Title:  of bag.
Title:  
Title:  "What's the matter with your nose, there?" said Stubb.  "Broke it?"
Title:  
Title:  "I wish it was broken, or that I didn't have any nose at all!"
Title:  answered the Guernsey-man, who did not seem to relish the job he was
Title:  at very much.  "But what are you holding YOURS for?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, nothing!  It's a wax nose; I have to hold it on.  Fine day,
Title:  ain't it?  Air rather gardenny, I should say; throw us a bunch of
Title:  posies, will ye, Bouton-de-Rose?"
Title:  
Title:  "What in the devil's name do you want here?" roared the Guernseyman,
Title:  flying into a sudden passion.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh! keep cool--cool? yes, that's the word! why don't you pack those
Title:  whales in ice while you're working at 'em?  But joking aside, though;
Title:  do you know, Rose-bud, that it's all nonsense trying to get any oil
Title:  out of such whales?  As for that dried up one, there, he hasn't a
Title:  gill in his whole carcase."
Title:  
Title:  "I know that well enough; but, d'ye see, the Captain here won't
Title:  believe it; this is his first voyage; he was a Cologne manufacturer
Title:  before.  But come aboard, and mayhap he'll believe you, if he won't
Title:  me; and so I'll get out of this dirty scrape."
Title:  
Title:  "Anything to oblige ye, my sweet and pleasant fellow," rejoined
Title:  Stubb, and with that he soon mounted to the deck.  There a queer
Title:  scene presented itself.  The sailors, in tasselled caps of red
Title:  worsted, were getting the heavy tackles in readiness for the whales.
Title:  But they worked rather slow and talked very fast, and seemed in
Title:  anything but a good humor.  All their noses upwardly projected from
Title:  their faces like so many jib-booms.  Now and then pairs of them would
Title:  drop their work, and run up to the mast-head to get some fresh air.
Title:  Some thinking they would catch the plague, dipped oakum in coal-tar,
Title:  and at intervals held it to their nostrils.  Others having broken the
Title:  stems of their pipes almost short off at the bowl, were vigorously
Title:  puffing tobacco-smoke, so that it constantly filled their
Title:  olfactories.
Title:  
Title:  Stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceeding
Title:  from the Captain's round-house abaft; and looking in that direction
Title:  saw a fiery face thrust from behind the door, which was held ajar
Title:  from within.  This was the tormented surgeon, who, after in vain
Title:  remonstrating against the proceedings of the day, had betaken himself
Title:  to the Captain's round-house (CABINET he called it) to avoid the
Title:  pest; but still, could not help yelling out his entreaties and
Title:  indignations at times.
Title:  
Title:  Marking all this, Stubb argued well for his scheme, and turning to
Title:  the Guernsey-man had a little chat with him, during which the
Title:  stranger mate expressed his detestation of his Captain as a conceited
Title:  ignoramus, who had brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitable
Title:  a pickle.  Sounding him carefully, Stubb further perceived that the
Title:  Guernsey-man had not the slightest suspicion concerning the
Title:  ambergris.  He therefore held his peace on that head, but otherwise
Title:  was quite frank and confidential with him, so that the two quickly
Title:  concocted a little plan for both circumventing and satirizing the
Title:  Captain, without his at all dreaming of distrusting their sincerity.
Title:  According to this little plan of theirs, the Guernsey-man, under
Title:  cover of an interpreter's office, was to tell the Captain what he
Title:  pleased, but as coming from Stubb; and as for Stubb, he was to utter
Title:  any nonsense that should come uppermost in him during the interview.
Title:  
Title:  By this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin.  He was a
Title:  small and dark, but rather delicate looking man for a sea-captain,
Title:  with large whiskers and moustache, however; and wore a red cotton
Title:  velvet vest with watch-seals at his side.  To this gentleman, Stubb
Title:  was now politely introduced by the Guernsey-man, who at once
Title:  ostentatiously put on the aspect of interpreting between them.
Title:  
Title:  "What shall I say to him first?" said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Why," said Stubb, eyeing the velvet vest and the watch and seals,
Title:  "you may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort of babyish
Title:  to me, though I don't pretend to be a judge."
Title:  
Title:  "He says, Monsieur," said the Guernsey-man, in French, turning to his
Title:  captain, "that only yesterday his ship spoke a vessel, whose captain
Title:  and chief-mate, with six sailors, had all died of a fever caught from
Title:  a blasted whale they had brought alongside."
Title:  
Title:  Upon this the captain started, and eagerly desired to know more.
Title:  
Title:  "What now?" said the Guernsey-man to Stubb.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, since he takes it so easy, tell him that now I have eyed him
Title:  carefully, I'm quite certain that he's no more fit to command a
Title:  whale-ship than a St. Jago monkey.  In fact, tell him from me he's a
Title:  baboon."
Title:  
Title:  "He vows and declares, Monsieur, that the other whale, the dried one,
Title:  is far more deadly than the blasted one; in fine, Monsieur, he
Title:  conjures us, as we value our lives, to cut loose from these fish."
Title:  
Title:  Instantly the captain ran forward, and in a loud voice commanded his
Title:  crew to desist from hoisting the cutting-tackles, and at once cast
Title:  loose the cables and chains confining the whales to the ship.
Title:  
Title:  "What now?" said the Guernsey-man, when the Captain had returned to
Title:  them.
Title:  
Title:  "Why, let me see; yes, you may as well tell him now that--that--in
Title:  fact, tell him I've diddled him, and (aside to himself) perhaps
Title:  somebody else."
Title:  
Title:  "He says, Monsieur, that he's very happy to have been of any service
Title:  to us."
Title:  
Title:  Hearing this, the captain vowed that they were the grateful parties
Title:  (meaning himself and mate) and concluded by inviting Stubb down
Title:  into his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux.
Title:  
Title:  "He wants you to take a glass of wine with him," said the
Title:  interpreter.
Title:  
Title:  "Thank him heartily; but tell him it's against my principles to drink
Title:  with the man I've diddled.  In fact, tell him I must go."
Title:  
Title:  "He says, Monsieur, that his principles won't admit of his drinking;
Title:  but that if Monsieur wants to live another day to drink, then
Title:  Monsieur had best drop all four boats, and pull the ship away from
Title:  these whales, for it's so calm they won't drift."
Title:  
Title:  By this time Stubb was over the side, and getting into his boat,
Title:  hailed the Guernsey-man to this effect,--that having a long tow-line
Title:  in his boat, he would do what he could to help them, by pulling out
Title:  the lighter whale of the two from the ship's side.  While the
Title:  Frenchman's boats, then, were engaged in towing the ship one way,
Title:  Stubb benevolently towed away at his whale the other way,
Title:  ostentatiously slacking out a most unusually long tow-line.
Title:  
Title:  Presently a breeze sprang up; Stubb feigned to cast off from the
Title:  whale; hoisting his boats, the Frenchman soon increased his distance,
Title:  while the Pequod slid in between him and Stubb's whale.  Whereupon
Title:  Stubb quickly pulled to the floating body, and hailing the Pequod to
Title:  give notice of his intentions, at once proceeded to reap the fruit of
Title:  his unrighteous cunning.  Seizing his sharp boat-spade, he commenced
Title:  an excavation in the body, a little behind the side fin.  You would
Title:  almost have thought he was digging a cellar there in the sea; and
Title:  when at length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs, it was like
Title:  turning up old Roman tiles and pottery buried in fat English loam.
Title:  His boat's crew were all in high excitement, eagerly helping their
Title:  chief, and looking as anxious as gold-hunters.
Title:  
Title:  And all the time numberless fowls were diving, and ducking, and
Title:  screaming, and yelling, and fighting around them.  Stubb was
Title:  beginning to look disappointed, especially as the horrible nosegay
Title:  increased, when suddenly from out the very heart of this plague,
Title:  there stole a faint stream of perfume, which flowed through the tide
Title:  of bad smells without being absorbed by it, as one river will flow
Title:  into and then along with another, without at all blending with it for
Title:  a time.
Title:  
Title:  "I have it, I have it," cried Stubb, with delight, striking something
Title:  in the subterranean regions, "a purse! a purse!"
Title:  
Title:  Dropping his spade, he thrust both hands in, and drew out handfuls of
Title:  something that looked like ripe Windsor soap, or rich mottled old
Title:  cheese; very unctuous and savory withal.  You might easily dent it
Title:  with your thumb; it is of a hue between yellow and ash colour.  And
Title:  this, good friends, is ambergris, worth a gold guinea an ounce to any
Title:  druggist.  Some six handfuls were obtained; but more was unavoidably
Title:  lost in the sea, and still more, perhaps, might have been secured
Title:  were it not for impatient Ahab's loud command to Stubb to desist, and
Title:  come on board, else the ship would bid them good bye.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 92
Title:  
Title:  Ambergris.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Now this ambergris is a very curious substance, and so important as
Title:  an article of commerce, that in 1791 a certain Nantucket-born Captain
Title:  Coffin was examined at the bar of the English House of Commons on
Title:  that subject.  For at that time, and indeed until a comparatively
Title:  late day, the precise origin of ambergris remained, like amber
Title:  itself, a problem to the learned.  Though the word ambergris is but
Title:  the French compound for grey amber, yet the two substances are quite
Title:  distinct.  For amber, though at times found on the sea-coast, is also
Title:  dug up in some far inland soils, whereas ambergris is never found
Title:  except upon the sea.  Besides, amber is a hard, transparent, brittle,
Title:  odorless substance, used for mouth-pieces to pipes, for beads and
Title:  ornaments; but ambergris is soft, waxy, and so highly fragrant and
Title:  spicy, that it is largely used in perfumery, in pastiles, precious
Title:  candles, hair-powders, and pomatum.  The Turks use it in cooking, and
Title:  also carry it to Mecca, for the same purpose that frankincense is
Title:  carried to St. Peter's in Rome.  Some wine merchants drop a few
Title:  grains into claret, to flavor it.
Title:  
Title:  Who would think, then, that such fine ladies and gentlemen should
Title:  regale themselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels of a
Title:  sick whale!  Yet so it is.  By some, ambergris is supposed to be the
Title:  cause, and by others the effect, of the dyspepsia in the whale.  How
Title:  to cure such a dyspepsia it were hard to say, unless by administering
Title:  three or four boat loads of Brandreth's pills, and then running out
Title:  of harm's way, as laborers do in blasting rocks.
Title:  
Title:  I have forgotten to say that there were found in this ambergris,
Title:  certain hard, round, bony plates, which at first Stubb thought might
Title:  be sailors' trowsers buttons; but it afterwards turned out that they
Title:  were nothing more than pieces of small squid bones embalmed in that
Title:  manner.
Title:  
Title:  Now that the incorruption of this most fragrant ambergris should be
Title:  found in the heart of such decay; is this nothing?  Bethink thee of
Title:  that saying of St. Paul in Corinthians, about corruption and
Title:  incorruption; how that we are sown in dishonour, but raised in glory.
Title:  And likewise call to mind that saying of Paracelsus about what it is
Title:  that maketh the best musk.  Also forget not the strange fact that of
Title:  all things of ill-savor, Cologne-water, in its rudimental
Title:  manufacturing stages, is the worst.
Title:  
Title:  I should like to conclude the chapter with the above appeal, but
Title:  cannot, owing to my anxiety to repel a charge often made against
Title:  whalemen, and which, in the estimation of some already biased minds,
Title:  might be considered as indirectly substantiated by what has been said
Title:  of the Frenchman's two whales.  Elsewhere in this volume the
Title:  slanderous aspersion has been disproved, that the vocation of whaling
Title:  is throughout a slatternly, untidy business.  But there is another
Title:  thing to rebut.  They hint that all whales always smell bad.  Now how
Title:  did this odious stigma originate?
Title:  
Title:  I opine, that it is plainly traceable to the first arrival of the
Title:  Greenland whaling ships in London, more than two centuries ago.
Title:  Because those whalemen did not then, and do not now, try out their
Title:  oil at sea as the Southern ships have always done; but cutting up the
Title:  fresh blubber in small bits, thrust it through the bung holes of
Title:  large casks, and carry it home in that manner; the shortness of the
Title:  season in those Icy Seas, and the sudden and violent storms to which
Title:  they are exposed, forbidding any other course.  The consequence is,
Title:  that upon breaking into the hold, and unloading one of these whale
Title:  cemeteries, in the Greenland dock, a savor is given forth somewhat
Title:  similar to that arising from excavating an old city grave-yard, for
Title:  the foundations of a Lying-in-Hospital.
Title:  
Title:  I partly surmise also, that this wicked charge against whalers may be
Title:  likewise imputed to the existence on the coast of Greenland, in
Title:  former times, of a Dutch village called Schmerenburgh or Smeerenberg,
Title:  which latter name is the one used by the learned Fogo Von Slack, in
Title:  his great work on Smells, a text-book on that subject.  As its name
Title:  imports (smeer, fat; berg, to put up), this village was founded in
Title:  order to afford a place for the blubber of the Dutch whale fleet to
Title:  be tried out, without being taken home to Holland for that purpose.
Title:  It was a collection of furnaces, fat-kettles, and oil sheds; and when
Title:  the works were in full operation certainly gave forth no very
Title:  pleasant savor.  But all this is quite different with a South Sea
Title:  Sperm Whaler; which in a voyage of four years perhaps, after
Title:  completely filling her hold with oil, does not, perhaps, consume
Title:  fifty days in the business of boiling out; and in the state that it
Title:  is casked, the oil is nearly scentless.  The truth is, that living or
Title:  dead, if but decently treated, whales as a species are by no means
Title:  creatures of ill odor; nor can whalemen be recognised, as the people
Title:  of the middle ages affected to detect a Jew in the company, by the
Title:  nose.  Nor indeed can the whale possibly be otherwise than fragrant,
Title:  when, as a general thing, he enjoys such high health; taking
Title:  abundance of exercise; always out of doors; though, it is true,
Title:  seldom in the open air.  I say, that the motion of a Sperm Whale's
Title:  flukes above water dispenses a perfume, as when a musk-scented lady
Title:  rustles her dress in a warm parlor.  What then shall I liken the
Title:  Sperm Whale to for fragrance, considering his magnitude?  Must it not
Title:  be to that famous elephant, with jewelled tusks, and redolent with
Title:  myrrh, which was led out of an Indian town to do honour to Alexander
Title:  the Great?
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 93
Title:  
Title:  The Castaway.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was but some few days after encountering the Frenchman, that a
Title:  most significant event befell the most insignificant of the Pequod's
Title:  crew; an event most lamentable; and which ended in providing the
Title:  sometimes madly merry and predestinated craft with a living and ever
Title:  accompanying prophecy of whatever shattered sequel might prove her
Title:  own.
Title:  
Title:  Now, in the whale ship, it is not every one that goes in the boats.
Title:  Some few hands are reserved called ship-keepers, whose province it is
Title:  to work the vessel while the boats are pursuing the whale.  As a
Title:  general thing, these ship-keepers are as hardy fellows as the men
Title:  comprising the boats' crews.  But if there happen to be an unduly
Title:  slender, clumsy, or timorous wight in the ship, that wight is certain
Title:  to be made a ship-keeper.  It was so in the Pequod with the little
Title:  negro Pippin by nick-name, Pip by abbreviation.  Poor Pip! ye have
Title:  heard of him before; ye must remember his tambourine on that dramatic
Title:  midnight, so gloomy-jolly.
Title:  
Title:  In outer aspect, Pip and Dough-Boy made a match, like a black pony
Title:  and a white one, of equal developments, though of dissimilar colour,
Title:  driven in one eccentric span.  But while hapless Dough-Boy was by
Title:  nature dull and torpid in his intellects, Pip, though over
Title:  tender-hearted, was at bottom very bright, with that pleasant,
Title:  genial, jolly brightness peculiar to his tribe; a tribe, which ever
Title:  enjoy all holidays and festivities with finer, freer relish than any
Title:  other race.  For blacks, the year's calendar should show naught but
Title:  three hundred and sixty-five Fourth of Julys and New Year's Days.
Title:  Nor smile so, while I write that this little black was brilliant, for
Title:  even blackness has its brilliancy; behold yon lustrous ebony,
Title:  panelled in king's cabinets.  But Pip loved life, and all life's
Title:  peaceable securities; so that the panic-striking business in which he
Title:  had somehow unaccountably become entrapped, had most sadly blurred
Title:  his brightness; though, as ere long will be seen, what was thus
Title:  temporarily subdued in him, in the end was destined to be luridly
Title:  illumined by strange wild fires, that fictitiously showed him off to
Title:  ten times the natural lustre with which in his native Tolland County
Title:  in Connecticut, he had once enlivened many a fiddler's frolic on the
Title:  green; and at melodious even-tide, with his gay ha-ha! had turned the
Title:  round horizon into one star-belled tambourine.  So, though in the
Title:  clear air of day, suspended against a blue-veined neck, the
Title:  pure-watered diamond drop will healthful glow; yet, when the cunning
Title:  jeweller would show you the diamond in its most impressive lustre, he
Title:  lays it against a gloomy ground, and then lights it up, not by the
Title:  sun, but by some unnatural gases.  Then come out those fiery
Title:  effulgences, infernally superb; then the evil-blazing diamond, once
Title:  the divinest symbol of the crystal skies, looks like some crown-jewel
Title:  stolen from the King of Hell.  But let us to the story.
Title:  
Title:  It came to pass, that in the ambergris affair Stubb's after-oarsman
Title:  chanced so to sprain his hand, as for a time to become quite maimed;
Title:  and, temporarily, Pip was put into his place.
Title:  
Title:  The first time Stubb lowered with him, Pip evinced much nervousness;
Title:  but happily, for that time, escaped close contact with the whale; and
Title:  therefore came off not altogether discreditably; though Stubb
Title:  observing him, took care, afterwards, to exhort him to cherish his
Title:  courageousness to the utmost, for he might often find it needful.
Title:  
Title:  Now upon the second lowering, the boat paddled upon the whale; and as
Title:  the fish received the darted iron, it gave its customary rap, which
Title:  happened, in this instance, to be right under poor Pip's seat.  The
Title:  involuntary consternation of the moment caused him to leap, paddle in
Title:  hand, out of the boat; and in such a way, that part of the slack
Title:  whale line coming against his chest, he breasted it overboard with
Title:  him, so as to become entangled in it, when at last plumping into the
Title:  water.  That instant the stricken whale started on a fierce run, the
Title:  line swiftly straightened; and presto! poor Pip came all foaming up
Title:  to the chocks of the boat, remorselessly dragged there by the line,
Title:  which had taken several turns around his chest and neck.
Title:  
Title:  Tashtego stood in the bows.  He was full of the fire of the hunt.  He
Title:  hated Pip for a poltroon.  Snatching the boat-knife from its sheath,
Title:  he suspended its sharp edge over the line, and turning towards Stubb,
Title:  exclaimed interrogatively, "Cut?"  Meantime Pip's blue, choked face
Title:  plainly looked, Do, for God's sake!  All passed in a flash.  In less
Title:  than half a minute, this entire thing happened.
Title:  
Title:  "Damn him, cut!" roared Stubb; and so the whale was lost and Pip was
Title:  saved.
Title:  
Title:  So soon as he recovered himself, the poor little negro was assailed
Title:  by yells and execrations from the crew.  Tranquilly permitting these
Title:  irregular cursings to evaporate, Stubb then in a plain,
Title:  business-like, but still half humorous manner, cursed Pip officially;
Title:  and that done, unofficially gave him much wholesome advice.  The
Title:  substance was, Never jump from a boat, Pip, except--but all the rest
Title:  was indefinite, as the soundest advice ever is.  Now, in general,
Title:  STICK TO THE BOAT, is your true motto in whaling; but cases will
Title:  sometimes happen when LEAP FROM THE BOAT, is still better.  Moreover,
Title:  as if perceiving at last that if he should give undiluted
Title:  conscientious advice to Pip, he would be leaving him too wide a
Title:  margin to jump in for the future; Stubb suddenly dropped all advice,
Title:  and concluded with a peremptory command, "Stick to the boat, Pip, or
Title:  by the Lord, I won't pick you up if you jump; mind that.  We can't
Title:  afford to lose whales by the likes of you; a whale would sell for
Title:  thirty times what you would, Pip, in Alabama.  Bear that in mind, and
Title:  don't jump any more."  Hereby perhaps Stubb indirectly hinted, that
Title:  though man loved his fellow, yet man is a money-making animal, which
Title:  propensity too often interferes with his benevolence.
Title:  
Title:  But we are all in the hands of the Gods; and Pip jumped again.  It
Title:  was under very similar circumstances to the first performance; but
Title:  this time he did not breast out the line; and hence, when the whale
Title:  started to run, Pip was left behind on the sea, like a hurried
Title:  traveller's trunk.  Alas!  Stubb was but too true to his word.  It
Title:  was a beautiful, bounteous, blue day; the spangled sea calm and
Title:  cool, and flatly stretching away, all round, to the horizon, like
Title:  gold-beater's skin hammered out to the extremest.  Bobbing up and
Title:  down in that sea, Pip's ebon head showed like a head of cloves.  No
Title:  boat-knife was lifted when he fell so rapidly astern.  Stubb's
Title:  inexorable back was turned upon him; and the whale was winged.  In
Title:  three minutes, a whole mile of shoreless ocean was between Pip and
Title:  Stubb.  Out from the centre of the sea, poor Pip turned his crisp,
Title:  curling, black head to the sun, another lonely castaway, though the
Title:  loftiest and the brightest.
Title:  
Title:  Now, in calm weather, to swim in the open ocean is as easy to the
Title:  practised swimmer as to ride in a spring-carriage ashore.  But the
Title:  awful lonesomeness is intolerable.  The intense concentration of self
Title:  in the middle of such a heartless immensity, my God! who can tell it?
Title:  Mark, how when sailors in a dead calm bathe in the open sea--mark
Title:  how closely they hug their ship and only coast along her sides.
Title:  
Title:  But had Stubb really abandoned the poor little negro to his fate?
Title:  No; he did not mean to, at least.  Because there were two boats in
Title:  his wake, and he supposed, no doubt, that they would of course come
Title:  up to Pip very quickly, and pick him up; though, indeed, such
Title:  considerations towards oarsmen jeopardized through their own
Title:  timidity, is not always manifested by the hunters in all similar
Title:  instances; and such instances not unfrequently occur; almost
Title:  invariably in the fishery, a coward, so called, is marked with the
Title:  same ruthless detestation peculiar to military navies and armies.
Title:  
Title:  But it so happened, that those boats, without seeing Pip, suddenly
Title:  spying whales close to them on one side, turned, and gave chase; and
Title:  Stubb's boat was now so far away, and he and all his crew so intent
Title:  upon his fish, that Pip's ringed horizon began to expand around him
Title:  miserably.  By the merest chance the ship itself at last rescued him;
Title:  but from that hour the little negro went about the deck an idiot;
Title:  such, at least, they said he was.  The sea had jeeringly kept his
Title:  finite body up, but drowned the infinite of his soul.  Not drowned
Title:  entirely, though.  Rather carried down alive to wondrous depths,
Title:  where strange shapes of the unwarped primal world glided to and fro
Title:  before his passive eyes; and the miser-merman, Wisdom, revealed his
Title:  hoarded heaps; and among the joyous, heartless, ever-juvenile
Title:  eternities, Pip saw the multitudinous, God-omnipresent, coral
Title:  insects, that out of the firmament of waters heaved the colossal
Title:  orbs.  He saw God's foot upon the treadle of the loom, and spoke it;
Title:  and therefore his shipmates called him mad.  So man's insanity is
Title:  heaven's sense; and wandering from all mortal reason, man comes at
Title:  last to that celestial thought, which, to reason, is absurd and
Title:  frantic; and weal or woe, feels then uncompromised, indifferent as
Title:  his God.
Title:  
Title:  For the rest, blame not Stubb too hardly.  The thing is common in
Title:  that fishery; and in the sequel of the narrative, it will then be
Title:  seen what like abandonment befell myself.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 94
Title:  
Title:  A Squeeze of the Hand.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  That whale of Stubb's, so dearly purchased, was duly brought to the
Title:  Pequod's side, where all those cutting and hoisting operations
Title:  previously detailed, were regularly gone through, even to the baling
Title:  of the Heidelburgh Tun, or Case.
Title:  
Title:  While some were occupied with this latter duty, others were employed
Title:  in dragging away the larger tubs, so soon as filled with the sperm;
Title:  and when the proper time arrived, this same sperm was carefully
Title:  manipulated ere going to the try-works, of which anon.
Title:  
Title:  It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree, that when, with
Title:  several others, I sat down before a large Constantine's bath of it, I
Title:  found it strangely concreted into lumps, here and there rolling about
Title:  in the liquid part.  It was our business to squeeze these lumps back
Title:  into fluid.  A sweet and unctuous duty!  No wonder that in old times
Title:  this sperm was such a favourite cosmetic.  Such a clearer! such a
Title:  sweetener! such a softener! such a delicious molifier!  After
Title:  having my hands in it for only a few minutes, my fingers felt like
Title:  eels, and began, as it were, to serpentine and spiralise.
Title:  
Title:  As I sat there at my ease, cross-legged on the deck; after the bitter
Title:  exertion at the windlass; under a blue tranquil sky; the ship under
Title:  indolent sail, and gliding so serenely along; as I bathed my hands
Title:  among those soft, gentle globules of infiltrated tissues, woven
Title:  almost within the hour; as they richly broke to my fingers, and
Title:  discharged all their opulence, like fully ripe grapes their wine; as
Title:  I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma,--literally and truly, like
Title:  the smell of spring violets; I declare to you, that for the time I
Title:  lived as in a musky meadow; I forgot all about our horrible oath; in
Title:  that inexpressible sperm, I washed my hands and my heart of it; I
Title:  almost began to credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is
Title:  of rare virtue in allaying the heat of anger; while bathing in that
Title:  bath, I felt divinely free from all ill-will, or petulance, or
Title:  malice, of any sort whatsoever.
Title:  
Title:  Squeeze! squeeze! squeeze! all the morning long; I squeezed that
Title:  sperm till I myself almost melted into it; I squeezed that sperm till
Title:  a strange sort of insanity came over me; and I found myself
Title:  unwittingly squeezing my co-laborers' hands in it, mistaking their
Title:  hands for the gentle globules.  Such an abounding, affectionate,
Title:  friendly, loving feeling did this avocation beget; that at last I was
Title:  continually squeezing their hands, and looking up into their eyes
Title:  sentimentally; as much as to say,--Oh! my dear fellow beings, why
Title:  should we longer cherish any social acerbities, or know the slightest
Title:  ill-humor or envy!  Come; let us squeeze hands all round; nay, let us
Title:  all squeeze ourselves into each other; let us squeeze ourselves
Title:  universally into the very milk and sperm of kindness.
Title:  
Title:  Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever!  For now,
Title:  since by many prolonged, repeated experiences, I have perceived that
Title:  in all cases man must eventually lower, or at least shift, his
Title:  conceit of attainable felicity; not placing it anywhere in the
Title:  intellect or the fancy; but in the wife, the heart, the bed, the
Title:  table, the saddle, the fireside, the country; now that I have
Title:  perceived all this, I am ready to squeeze case eternally.  In
Title:  thoughts of the visions of the night, I saw long rows of angels in
Title:  paradise, each with his hands in a jar of spermaceti.
Title:  
Title:  Now, while discoursing of sperm, it behooves to speak of other things
Title:  akin to it, in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the
Title:  try-works.
Title:  
Title:  First comes white-horse, so called, which is obtained from the
Title:  tapering part of the fish, and also from the thicker portions of his
Title:  flukes.  It is tough with congealed tendons--a wad of muscle--but
Title:  still contains some oil.  After being severed from the whale, the
Title:  white-horse is first cut into portable oblongs ere going to the
Title:  mincer.  They look much like blocks of Berkshire marble.
Title:  
Title:  Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of
Title:  the whale's flesh, here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber,
Title:  and often participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness.
Title:  It is a most refreshing, convivial, beautiful object to behold.  As
Title:  its name imports, it is of an exceedingly rich, mottled tint, with a
Title:  bestreaked snowy and golden ground, dotted with spots of the deepest
Title:  crimson and purple.  It is plums of rubies, in pictures of citron.
Title:  Spite of reason, it is hard to keep yourself from eating it.  I
Title:  confess, that once I stole behind the foremast to try it.  It tasted
Title:  something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis
Title:  le Gros might have tasted, supposing him to have been killed the
Title:  first day after the venison season, and that particular venison
Title:  season contemporary with an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards
Title:  of Champagne.
Title:  
Title:  There is another substance, and a very singular one, which turns up
Title:  in the course of this business, but which I feel it to be very
Title:  puzzling adequately to describe.  It is called slobgollion; an
Title:  appellation original with the whalemen, and even so is the nature of
Title:  the substance.  It is an ineffably oozy, stringy affair, most
Title:  frequently found in the tubs of sperm, after a prolonged squeezing,
Title:  and subsequent decanting.  I hold it to be the wondrously thin,
Title:  ruptured membranes of the case, coalescing.
Title:  
Title:  Gurry, so called, is a term properly belonging to right whalemen, but
Title:  sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen.  It designates
Title:  the dark, glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the
Title:  Greenland or right whale, and much of which covers the decks of those
Title:  inferior souls who hunt that ignoble Leviathan.
Title:  
Title:  Nippers.  Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale's
Title:  vocabulary.  But as applied by whalemen, it becomes so.  A whaleman's
Title:  nipper is a short firm strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering
Title:  part of Leviathan's tail: it averages an inch in thickness, and for
Title:  the rest, is about the size of the iron part of a hoe.  Edgewise
Title:  moved along the oily deck, it operates like a leathern squilgee; and
Title:  by nameless blandishments, as of magic, allures along with it all
Title:  impurities.
Title:  
Title:  But to learn all about these recondite matters, your best way is at
Title:  once to descend into the blubber-room, and have a long talk with its
Title:  inmates.  This place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle
Title:  for the blanket-pieces, when stript and hoisted from the whale.  When
Title:  the proper time arrives for cutting up its contents, this apartment
Title:  is a scene of terror to all tyros, especially by night.  On one side,
Title:  lit by a dull lantern, a space has been left clear for the workmen.
Title:  They generally go in pairs,--a pike-and-gaffman and a spade-man.
Title:  The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate's boarding-weapon of the
Title:  same name.  The gaff is something like a boat-hook.  With his gaff,
Title:  the gaffman hooks on to a sheet of blubber, and strives to hold it
Title:  from slipping, as the ship pitches and lurches about.  Meanwhile, the
Title:  spade-man stands on the sheet itself, perpendicularly chopping it
Title:  into the portable horse-pieces.  This spade is sharp as hone can make
Title:  it; the spademan's feet are shoeless; the thing he stands on will
Title:  sometimes irresistibly slide away from him, like a sledge.  If he
Title:  cuts off one of his own toes, or one of his assistants', would you be
Title:  very much astonished?  Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room
Title:  men.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 95
Title:  
Title:  The Cassock.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this
Title:  post-mortemizing of the whale; and had you strolled forward nigh the
Title:  windlass, pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small
Title:  curiosity a very strange, enigmatical object, which you would have
Title:  seen there, lying along lengthwise in the lee scuppers.  Not the
Title:  wondrous cistern in the whale's huge head; not the prodigy of his
Title:  unhinged lower jaw; not the miracle of his symmetrical tail; none of
Title:  these would so surprise you, as half a glimpse of that unaccountable
Title:  cone,--longer than a Kentuckian is tall, nigh a foot in diameter at
Title:  the base, and jet-black as Yojo, the ebony idol of Queequeg.  And an
Title:  idol, indeed, it is; or, rather, in old times, its likeness was.
Title:  Such an idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in
Title:  Judea; and for worshipping which, King Asa, her son, did depose her,
Title:  and destroyed the idol, and burnt it for an abomination at the brook
Title:  Kedron, as darkly set forth in the 15th chapter of the First Book of
Title:  Kings.
Title:  
Title:  Look at the sailor, called the mincer, who now comes along, and
Title:  assisted by two allies, heavily backs the grandissimus, as the
Title:  mariners call it, and with bowed shoulders, staggers off with it as
Title:  if he were a grenadier carrying a dead comrade from the field.
Title:  Extending it upon the forecastle deck, he now proceeds cylindrically
Title:  to remove its dark pelt, as an African hunter the pelt of a boa.
Title:  This done he turns the pelt inside out, like a pantaloon leg; gives
Title:  it a good stretching, so as almost to double its diameter; and at
Title:  last hangs it, well spread, in the rigging, to dry.  Ere long, it is
Title:  taken down; when removing some three feet of it, towards the pointed
Title:  extremity, and then cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end,
Title:  he lengthwise slips himself bodily into it.  The mincer now stands
Title:  before you invested in the full canonicals of his calling.
Title:  Immemorial to all his order, this investiture alone will adequately
Title:  protect him, while employed in the peculiar functions of his office.
Title:  
Title:  That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the
Title:  pots; an operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse,
Title:  planted endwise against the bulwarks, and with a capacious tub
Title:  beneath it, into which the minced pieces drop, fast as the sheets
Title:  from a rapt orator's desk.  Arrayed in decent black; occupying a
Title:  conspicuous pulpit; intent on bible leaves; what a candidate for an
Title:  archbishopric, what a lad for a Pope were this mincer!*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *Bible leaves!  Bible leaves!  This is the invariable cry from the
Title:  mates to the mincer.  It enjoins him to be careful, and cut his work
Title:  into as thin slices as possible, inasmuch as by so doing the business
Title:  of boiling out the oil is much accelerated, and its quantity
Title:  considerably increased, besides perhaps improving it in quality.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 96
Title:  
Title:  The Try-Works.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Besides her hoisted boats, an American whaler is outwardly
Title:  distinguished by her try-works.  She presents the curious anomaly of
Title:  the most solid masonry joining with oak and hemp in constituting the
Title:  completed ship.  It is as if from the open field a brick-kiln were
Title:  transported to her planks.
Title:  
Title:  The try-works are planted between the foremast and mainmast, the
Title:  most roomy part of the deck.  The timbers beneath are of a peculiar
Title:  strength, fitted to sustain the weight of an almost solid mass of
Title:  brick and mortar, some ten feet by eight square, and five in height.
Title:  The foundation does not penetrate the deck, but the masonry is firmly
Title:  secured to the surface by ponderous knees of iron bracing it on all
Title:  sides, and screwing it down to the timbers.  On the flanks it is
Title:  cased with wood, and at top completely covered by a large, sloping,
Title:  battened hatchway.  Removing this hatch we expose the great try-pots,
Title:  two in number, and each of several barrels' capacity.  When not in
Title:  use, they are kept remarkably clean.  Sometimes they are polished
Title:  with soapstone and sand, till they shine within like silver
Title:  punch-bowls.  During the night-watches some cynical old sailors will
Title:  crawl into them and coil themselves away there for a nap.  While
Title:  employed in polishing them--one man in each pot, side by side--many
Title:  confidential communications are carried on, over the iron lips.  It
Title:  is a place also for profound mathematical meditation.  It was in the
Title:  left hand try-pot of the Pequod, with the soapstone diligently
Title:  circling round me, that I was first indirectly struck by the
Title:  remarkable fact, that in geometry all bodies gliding along the
Title:  cycloid, my soapstone for example, will descend from any point in
Title:  precisely the same time.
Title:  
Title:  Removing the fire-board from the front of the try-works, the bare
Title:  masonry of that side is exposed, penetrated by the two iron mouths of
Title:  the furnaces, directly underneath the pots.  These mouths are fitted
Title:  with heavy doors of iron.  The intense heat of the fire is prevented
Title:  from communicating itself to the deck, by means of a shallow
Title:  reservoir extending under the entire inclosed surface of the works.
Title:  By a tunnel inserted at the rear, this reservoir is kept replenished
Title:  with water as fast as it evaporates.  There are no external chimneys;
Title:  they open direct from the rear wall.  And here let us go back for a
Title:  moment.
Title:  
Title:  It was about nine o'clock at night that the Pequod's try-works were
Title:  first started on this present voyage.  It belonged to Stubb to
Title:  oversee the business.
Title:  
Title:  "All ready there?  Off hatch, then, and start her.  You cook, fire
Title:  the works."  This was an easy thing, for the carpenter had been
Title:  thrusting his shavings into the furnace throughout the passage.  Here
Title:  be it said that in a whaling voyage the first fire in the try-works has
Title:  to be fed for a time with wood.  After that no wood is used, except
Title:  as a means of quick ignition to the staple fuel.  In a word, after
Title:  being tried out, the crisp, shrivelled blubber, now called scraps or
Title:  fritters, still contains considerable of its unctuous properties.
Title:  These fritters feed the flames.  Like a plethoric burning martyr, or
Title:  a self-consuming misanthrope, once ignited, the whale supplies his
Title:  own fuel and burns by his own body.  Would that he consumed his own
Title:  smoke! for his smoke is horrible to inhale, and inhale it you must,
Title:  and not only that, but you must live in it for the time.  It has an
Title:  unspeakable, wild, Hindoo odor about it, such as may lurk in the
Title:  vicinity of funereal pyres.  It smells like the left wing of the day
Title:  of judgment; it is an argument for the pit.
Title:  
Title:  By midnight the works were in full operation.  We were clear from the
Title:  carcase; sail had been made; the wind was freshening; the wild ocean
Title:  darkness was intense.  But that darkness was licked up by the fierce
Title:  flames, which at intervals forked forth from the sooty flues, and
Title:  illuminated every lofty rope in the rigging, as with the famed Greek
Title:  fire.  The burning ship drove on, as if remorselessly commissioned to
Title:  some vengeful deed.  So the pitch and sulphur-freighted brigs of the
Title:  bold Hydriote, Canaris, issuing from their midnight harbors, with
Title:  broad sheets of flame for sails, bore down upon the Turkish frigates,
Title:  and folded them in conflagrations.
Title:  
Title:  The hatch, removed from the top of the works, now afforded a wide
Title:  hearth in front of them.  Standing on this were the Tartarean shapes
Title:  of the pagan harpooneers, always the whale-ship's stokers.  With huge
Title:  pronged poles they pitched hissing masses of blubber into the
Title:  scalding pots, or stirred up the fires beneath, till the snaky flames
Title:  darted, curling, out of the doors to catch them by the feet.  The
Title:  smoke rolled away in sullen heaps.  To every pitch of the ship there
Title:  was a pitch of the boiling oil, which seemed all eagerness to leap
Title:  into their faces.  Opposite the mouth of the works, on the further
Title:  side of the wide wooden hearth, was the windlass.  This served for a
Title:  sea-sofa.  Here lounged the watch, when not otherwise employed,
Title:  looking into the red heat of the fire, till their eyes felt scorched
Title:  in their heads.  Their tawny features, now all begrimed with smoke
Title:  and sweat, their matted beards, and the contrasting barbaric
Title:  brilliancy of their teeth, all these were strangely revealed in the
Title:  capricious emblazonings of the works.  As they narrated to each other
Title:  their unholy adventures, their tales of terror told in words of
Title:  mirth; as their uncivilized laughter forked upwards out of them, like
Title:  the flames from the furnace; as to and fro, in their front, the
Title:  harpooneers wildly gesticulated with their huge pronged forks and
Title:  dippers; as the wind howled on, and the sea leaped, and the ship
Title:  groaned and dived, and yet steadfastly shot her red hell further and
Title:  further into the blackness of the sea and the night, and scornfully
Title:  champed the white bone in her mouth, and viciously spat round her on
Title:  all sides; then the rushing Pequod, freighted with savages, and laden
Title:  with fire, and burning a corpse, and plunging into that blackness of
Title:  darkness, seemed the material counterpart of her monomaniac
Title:  commander's soul.
Title:  
Title:  So seemed it to me, as I stood at her helm, and for long hours
Title:  silently guided the way of this fire-ship on the sea.  Wrapped, for
Title:  that interval, in darkness myself, I but the better saw the redness,
Title:  the madness, the ghastliness of others.  The continual sight of the
Title:  fiend shapes before me, capering half in smoke and half in fire,
Title:  these at last begat kindred visions in my soul, so soon as I began to
Title:  yield to that unaccountable drowsiness which ever would come over me
Title:  at a midnight helm.
Title:  
Title:  But that night, in particular, a strange (and ever since
Title:  inexplicable) thing occurred to me.  Starting from a brief standing
Title:  sleep, I was horribly conscious of something fatally wrong.  The
Title:  jaw-bone tiller smote my side, which leaned against it; in my ears
Title:  was the low hum of sails, just beginning to shake in the wind; I
Title:  thought my eyes were open; I was half conscious of putting my fingers
Title:  to the lids and mechanically stretching them still further apart.
Title:  But, spite of all this, I could see no compass before me to steer by;
Title:  though it seemed but a minute since I had been watching the card, by
Title:  the steady binnacle lamp illuminating it.  Nothing seemed before me
Title:  but a jet gloom, now and then made ghastly by flashes of redness.
Title:  Uppermost was the impression, that whatever swift, rushing thing I
Title:  stood on was not so much bound to any haven ahead as rushing from all
Title:  havens astern.  A stark, bewildered feeling, as of death, came over
Title:  me.  Convulsively my hands grasped the tiller, but with the crazy
Title:  conceit that the tiller was, somehow, in some enchanted way,
Title:  inverted.  My God! what is the matter with me? thought I.  Lo! in my
Title:  brief sleep I had turned myself about, and was fronting the ship's
Title:  stern, with my back to her prow and the compass.  In an instant I
Title:  faced back, just in time to prevent the vessel from flying up into
Title:  the wind, and very probably capsizing her.  How glad and how grateful
Title:  the relief from this unnatural hallucination of the night, and the
Title:  fatal contingency of being brought by the lee!
Title:  
Title:  Look not too long in the face of the fire, O man!  Never dream with
Title:  thy hand on the helm!  Turn not thy back to the compass; accept the
Title:  first hint of the hitching tiller; believe not the artificial fire,
Title:  when its redness makes all things look ghastly.  To-morrow, in the
Title:  natural sun, the skies will be bright; those who glared like devils
Title:  in the forking flames, the morn will show in far other, at least
Title:  gentler, relief; the glorious, golden, glad sun, the only true
Title:  lamp--all others but liars!
Title:  
Title:  Nevertheless the sun hides not Virginia's Dismal Swamp, nor Rome's
Title:  accursed Campagna, nor wide Sahara, nor all the millions of miles of
Title:  deserts and of griefs beneath the moon.  The sun hides not the ocean,
Title:  which is the dark side of this earth, and which is two thirds of this
Title:  earth.  So, therefore, that mortal man who hath more of joy than
Title:  sorrow in him, that mortal man cannot be true--not true, or
Title:  undeveloped.  With books the same.  The truest of all men was the Man
Title:  of Sorrows, and the truest of all books is Solomon's, and
Title:  Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of woe.  "All is vanity."
Title:  ALL.  This wilful world hath not got hold of unchristian Solomon's
Title:  wisdom yet.  But he who dodges hospitals and jails, and walks fast
Title:  crossing graveyards, and would rather talk of operas than hell;
Title:  calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau, poor devils all of sick men;
Title:  and throughout a care-free lifetime swears by Rabelais as passing
Title:  wise, and therefore jolly;--not that man is fitted to sit down on
Title:  tomb-stones, and break the green damp mould with unfathomably
Title:  wondrous Solomon.
Title:  
Title:  But even Solomon, he says, "the man that wandereth out of the way of
Title:  understanding shall remain" (I.E., even while living) "in the
Title:  congregation of the dead."  Give not thyself up, then, to fire, lest
Title:  it invert thee, deaden thee; as for the time it did me.  There is a
Title:  wisdom that is woe; but there is a woe that is madness.  And there is
Title:  a Catskill eagle in some souls that can alike dive down into the
Title:  blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and become invisible in
Title:  the sunny spaces.  And even if he for ever flies within the gorge,
Title:  that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest swoop the
Title:  mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the plain, even
Title:  though they soar.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 97
Title:  
Title:  The Lamp.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Had you descended from the Pequod's try-works to the Pequod's
Title:  forecastle, where the off duty watch were sleeping, for one single
Title:  moment you would have almost thought you were standing in some
Title:  illuminated shrine of canonized kings and counsellors.  There they
Title:  lay in their triangular oaken vaults, each mariner a chiselled
Title:  muteness; a score of lamps flashing upon his hooded eyes.
Title:  
Title:  In merchantmen, oil for the sailor is more scarce than the milk of
Title:  queens.  To dress in the dark, and eat in the dark, and stumble in
Title:  darkness to his pallet, this is his usual lot.  But the whaleman, as
Title:  he seeks the food of light, so he lives in light.  He makes his berth
Title:  an Aladdin's lamp, and lays him down in it; so that in the pitchiest
Title:  night the ship's black hull still houses an illumination.
Title:  
Title:  See with what entire freedom the whaleman takes his handful of
Title:  lamps--often but old bottles and vials, though--to the copper cooler
Title:  at the try-works, and replenishes them there, as mugs of ale at a
Title:  vat.  He burns, too, the purest of oil, in its unmanufactured, and,
Title:  therefore, unvitiated state; a fluid unknown to solar, lunar, or
Title:  astral contrivances ashore.  It is sweet as early grass butter in
Title:  April.  He goes and hunts for his oil, so as to be sure of its
Title:  freshness and genuineness, even as the traveller on the prairie hunts
Title:  up his own supper of game.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 98
Title:  
Title:  Stowing Down and Clearing Up.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Already has it been related how the great leviathan is afar off
Title:  descried from the mast-head; how he is chased over the watery moors,
Title:  and slaughtered in the valleys of the deep; how he is then towed
Title:  alongside and beheaded; and how (on the principle which entitled the
Title:  headsman of old to the garments in which the beheaded was killed) his
Title:  great padded surtout becomes the property of his executioner; how, in
Title:  due time, he is condemned to the pots, and, like Shadrach, Meshach,
Title:  and Abednego, his spermaceti, oil, and bone pass unscathed through
Title:  the fire;--but now it remains to conclude the last chapter of this
Title:  part of the description by rehearsing--singing, if I may--the
Title:  romantic proceeding of decanting off his oil into the casks and
Title:  striking them down into the hold, where once again leviathan returns
Title:  to his native profundities, sliding along beneath the surface as
Title:  before; but, alas! never more to rise and blow.
Title:  
Title:  While still warm, the oil, like hot punch, is received into the
Title:  six-barrel casks; and while, perhaps, the ship is pitching and
Title:  rolling this way and that in the midnight sea, the enormous casks are
Title:  slewed round and headed over, end for end, and sometimes perilously
Title:  scoot across the slippery deck, like so many land slides, till at
Title:  last man-handled and stayed in their course; and all round the hoops,
Title:  rap, rap, go as many hammers as can play upon them, for now, EX
Title:  OFFICIO, every sailor is a cooper.
Title:  
Title:  At length, when the last pint is casked, and all is cool, then the
Title:  great hatchways are unsealed, the bowels of the ship are thrown open,
Title:  and down go the casks to their final rest in the sea.  This done, the
Title:  hatches are replaced, and hermetically closed, like a closet walled
Title:  up.
Title:  
Title:  In the sperm fishery, this is perhaps one of the most remarkable
Title:  incidents in all the business of whaling.  One day the planks stream
Title:  with freshets of blood and oil; on the sacred quarter-deck enormous
Title:  masses of the whale's head are profanely piled; great rusty casks lie
Title:  about, as in a brewery yard; the smoke from the try-works has
Title:  besooted all the bulwarks; the mariners go about suffused with
Title:  unctuousness; the entire ship seems great leviathan himself; while on
Title:  all hands the din is deafening.
Title:  
Title:  But a day or two after, you look about you, and prick your ears in
Title:  this self-same ship; and were it not for the tell-tale boats and
Title:  try-works, you would all but swear you trod some silent merchant
Title:  vessel, with a most scrupulously neat commander.  The unmanufactured
Title:  sperm oil possesses a singularly cleansing virtue.  This is the
Title:  reason why the decks never look so white as just after what they call
Title:  an affair of oil.  Besides, from the ashes of the burned scraps of
Title:  the whale, a potent lye is readily made; and whenever any
Title:  adhesiveness from the back of the whale remains clinging to the side,
Title:  that lye quickly exterminates it.  Hands go diligently along the
Title:  bulwarks, and with buckets of water and rags restore them to their
Title:  full tidiness.  The soot is brushed from the lower rigging.  All the
Title:  numerous implements which have been in use are likewise faithfully
Title:  cleansed and put away.  The great hatch is scrubbed and placed upon
Title:  the try-works, completely hiding the pots; every cask is out of
Title:  sight; all tackles are coiled in unseen nooks; and when by the
Title:  combined and simultaneous industry of almost the entire ship's
Title:  company, the whole of this conscientious duty is at last concluded,
Title:  then the crew themselves proceed to their own ablutions; shift
Title:  themselves from top to toe; and finally issue to the immaculate deck,
Title:  fresh and all aglow, as bridegrooms new-leaped from out the daintiest
Title:  Holland.
Title:  
Title:  Now, with elated step, they pace the planks in twos and threes, and
Title:  humorously discourse of parlors, sofas, carpets, and fine cambrics;
Title:  propose to mat the deck; think of having hanging to the top; object
Title:  not to taking tea by moonlight on the piazza of the forecastle.  To
Title:  hint to such musked mariners of oil, and bone, and blubber, were
Title:  little short of audacity.  They know not the thing you distantly
Title:  allude to.  Away, and bring us napkins!
Title:  
Title:  But mark: aloft there, at the three mast heads, stand three men
Title:  intent on spying out more whales, which, if caught, infallibly will
Title:  again soil the old oaken furniture, and drop at least one small
Title:  grease-spot somewhere.  Yes; and many is the time, when, after the
Title:  severest uninterrupted labors, which know no night; continuing
Title:  straight through for ninety-six hours; when from the boat, where they
Title:  have swelled their wrists with all day rowing on the Line,--they only
Title:  step to the deck to carry vast chains, and heave the heavy windlass,
Title:  and cut and slash, yea, and in their very sweatings to be smoked and
Title:  burned anew by the combined fires of the equatorial sun and the
Title:  equatorial try-works; when, on the heel of all this, they have
Title:  finally bestirred themselves to cleanse the ship, and make a spotless
Title:  dairy room of it; many is the time the poor fellows, just buttoning
Title:  the necks of their clean frocks, are startled by the cry of "There
Title:  she blows!" and away they fly to fight another whale, and go through
Title:  the whole weary thing again.  Oh! my friends, but this is
Title:  man-killing!  Yet this is life.  For hardly have we mortals by long
Title:  toilings extracted from this world's vast bulk its small but
Title:  valuable sperm; and then, with weary patience, cleansed ourselves
Title:  from its defilements, and learned to live here in clean tabernacles
Title:  of the soul; hardly is this done, when--THERE SHE BLOWS!--the ghost
Title:  is spouted up, and away we sail to fight some other world, and go
Title:  through young life's old routine again.
Title:  
Title:  Oh! the metempsychosis!  Oh!  Pythagoras, that in bright Greece, two
Title:  thousand years ago, did die, so good, so wise, so mild; I sailed with
Title:  thee along the Peruvian coast last voyage--and, foolish as I am,
Title:  taught thee, a green simple boy, how to splice a rope!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 99
Title:  
Title:  The Doubloon.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Ere now it has been related how Ahab was wont to pace his
Title:  quarter-deck, taking regular turns at either limit, the binnacle and
Title:  mainmast; but in the multiplicity of other things requiring narration
Title:  it has not been added how that sometimes in these walks, when most
Title:  plunged in his mood, he was wont to pause in turn at each spot, and
Title:  stand there strangely eyeing the particular object before him.  When
Title:  he halted before the binnacle, with his glance fastened on the
Title:  pointed needle in the compass, that glance shot like a javelin with
Title:  the pointed intensity of his purpose; and when resuming his walk he
Title:  again paused before the mainmast, then, as the same riveted glance
Title:  fastened upon the riveted gold coin there, he still wore the same
Title:  aspect of nailed firmness, only dashed with a certain wild longing,
Title:  if not hopefulness.
Title:  
Title:  But one morning, turning to pass the doubloon, he seemed to be newly
Title:  attracted by the strange figures and inscriptions stamped on it, as
Title:  though now for the first time beginning to interpret for himself in
Title:  some monomaniac way whatever significance might lurk in them.  And
Title:  some certain significance lurks in all things, else all things are
Title:  little worth, and the round world itself but an empty cipher, except
Title:  to sell by the cartload, as they do hills about Boston, to fill up
Title:  some morass in the Milky Way.
Title:  
Title:  Now this doubloon was of purest, virgin gold, raked somewhere out of
Title:  the heart of gorgeous hills, whence, east and west, over golden
Title:  sands, the head-waters of many a Pactolus flows.  And though now
Title:  nailed amidst all the rustiness of iron bolts and the verdigris of
Title:  copper spikes, yet, untouchable and immaculate to any foulness, it
Title:  still preserved its Quito glow.  Nor, though placed amongst a
Title:  ruthless crew and every hour passed by ruthless hands, and through
Title:  the livelong nights shrouded with thick darkness which might cover
Title:  any pilfering approach, nevertheless every sunrise found the doubloon
Title:  where the sunset left it last.  For it was set apart and sanctified
Title:  to one awe-striking end; and however wanton in their sailor ways, one
Title:  and all, the mariners revered it as the white whale's talisman.
Title:  Sometimes they talked it over in the weary watch by night, wondering
Title:  whose it was to be at last, and whether he would ever live to spend
Title:  it.
Title:  
Title:  Now those noble golden coins of South America are as medals of the
Title:  sun and tropic token-pieces.  Here palms, alpacas, and volcanoes;
Title:  sun's disks and stars; ecliptics, horns-of-plenty, and rich banners
Title:  waving, are in luxuriant profusion stamped; so that the precious gold
Title:  seems almost to derive an added preciousness and enhancing glories,
Title:  by passing through those fancy mints, so Spanishly poetic.
Title:  
Title:  It so chanced that the doubloon of the Pequod was a most wealthy
Title:  example of these things.  On its round border it bore the letters,
Title:  REPUBLICA DEL ECUADOR: QUITO.  So this bright coin came from a
Title:  country planted in the middle of the world, and beneath the great
Title:  equator, and named after it; and it had been cast midway up the
Title:  Andes, in the unwaning clime that knows no autumn.  Zoned by those
Title:  letters you saw the likeness of three Andes' summits; from one a
Title:  flame; a tower on another; on the third a crowing cock; while arching
Title:  over all was a segment of the partitioned zodiac, the signs all
Title:  marked with their usual cabalistics, and the keystone sun entering
Title:  the equinoctial point at Libra.
Title:  
Title:  Before this equatorial coin, Ahab, not unobserved by others, was now
Title:  pausing.
Title:  
Title:  "There's something ever egotistical in mountain-tops and towers, and
Title:  all other grand and lofty things; look here,--three peaks as proud as
Title:  Lucifer.  The firm tower, that is Ahab; the volcano, that is Ahab;
Title:  the courageous, the undaunted, and victorious fowl, that, too, is
Title:  Ahab; all are Ahab; and this round gold is but the image of the
Title:  rounder globe, which, like a magician's glass, to each and every man
Title:  in turn but mirrors back his own mysterious self.  Great pains, small
Title:  gains for those who ask the world to solve them; it cannot solve
Title:  itself.  Methinks now this coined sun wears a ruddy face; but see!
Title:  aye, he enters the sign of storms, the equinox! and but six months
Title:  before he wheeled out of a former equinox at Aries!  From storm to
Title:  storm!  So be it, then.  Born in throes, 't is fit that man should
Title:  live in pains and die in pangs!  So be it, then!  Here's stout stuff
Title:  for woe to work on.  So be it, then."
Title:  
Title:  "No fairy fingers can have pressed the gold, but devil's claws must have
Title:  left their mouldings there since yesterday," murmured Starbuck to
Title:  himself, leaning against the bulwarks.  "The old man seems to read
Title:  Belshazzar's awful writing.  I have never marked the coin
Title:  inspectingly.  He goes below; let me read.  A dark valley between
Title:  three mighty, heaven-abiding peaks, that almost seem the Trinity, in
Title:  some faint earthly symbol.  So in this vale of Death, God girds us
Title:  round; and over all our gloom, the sun of Righteousness still shines
Title:  a beacon and a hope.  If we bend down our eyes, the dark vale shows
Title:  her mouldy soil; but if we lift them, the bright sun meets our glance
Title:  half way, to cheer.  Yet, oh, the great sun is no fixture; and if, at
Title:  midnight, we would fain snatch some sweet solace from him, we gaze
Title:  for him in vain!  This coin speaks wisely, mildly, truly, but still
Title:  sadly to me.  I will quit it, lest Truth shake me falsely."
Title:  
Title:  "There now's the old Mogul," soliloquized Stubb by the try-works,
Title:  "he's been twigging it; and there goes Starbuck from the same, and
Title:  both with faces which I should say might be somewhere within nine
Title:  fathoms long.  And all from looking at a piece of gold, which did I
Title:  have it now on Negro Hill or in Corlaer's Hook, I'd not look at it
Title:  very long ere spending it.  Humph! in my poor, insignificant opinion,
Title:  I regard this as queer.  I have seen doubloons before now in my
Title:  voyagings; your doubloons of old Spain, your doubloons of Peru, your
Title:  doubloons of Chili, your doubloons of Bolivia, your doubloons of
Title:  Popayan; with plenty of gold moidores and pistoles, and joes, and
Title:  half joes, and quarter joes.  What then should there be in this
Title:  doubloon of the Equator that is so killing wonderful?  By Golconda!
Title:  let me read it once.  Halloa! here's signs and wonders truly!  That,
Title:  now, is what old Bowditch in his Epitome calls the zodiac, and what
Title:  my almanac below calls ditto.  I'll get the almanac and as I have
Title:  heard devils can be raised with Daboll's arithmetic, I'll try my hand
Title:  at raising a meaning out of these queer curvicues here with the
Title:  Massachusetts calendar.  Here's the book.  Let's see now.  Signs and
Title:  wonders; and the sun, he's always among 'em.  Hem, hem, hem; here
Title:  they are--here they go--all alive:--Aries, or the Ram; Taurus, or the
Title:  Bull and Jimimi! here's Gemini himself, or the Twins.  Well; the sun
Title:  he wheels among 'em.  Aye, here on the coin he's just crossing the
Title:  threshold between two of twelve sitting-rooms all in a ring.  Book!
Title:  you lie there; the fact is, you books must know your places.  You'll
Title:  do to give us the bare words and facts, but we come in to supply the
Title:  thoughts.  That's my small experience, so far as the Massachusetts
Title:  calendar, and Bowditch's navigator, and Daboll's arithmetic go.
Title:  Signs and wonders, eh?  Pity if there is nothing wonderful in signs,
Title:  and significant in wonders!  There's a clue somewhere; wait a bit;
Title:  hist--hark!  By Jove, I have it!  Look you, Doubloon, your zodiac
Title:  here is the life of man in one round chapter; and now I'll read it
Title:  off, straight out of the book.  Come, Almanack!  To begin: there's
Title:  Aries, or the Ram--lecherous dog, he begets us; then, Taurus, or the
Title:  Bull--he bumps us the first thing; then Gemini, or the Twins--that
Title:  is, Virtue and Vice; we try to reach Virtue, when lo! comes Cancer
Title:  the Crab, and drags us back; and here, going from Virtue, Leo, a
Title:  roaring Lion, lies in the path--he gives a few fierce bites and surly
Title:  dabs with his paw; we escape, and hail Virgo, the Virgin! that's our
Title:  first love; we marry and think to be happy for aye, when pop comes
Title:  Libra, or the Scales--happiness weighed and found wanting; and while
Title:  we are very sad about that, Lord! how we suddenly jump, as Scorpio,
Title:  or the Scorpion, stings us in the rear; we are curing the wound, when
Title:  whang come the arrows all round; Sagittarius, or the Archer, is
Title:  amusing himself.  As we pluck out the shafts, stand aside! here's
Title:  the battering-ram, Capricornus, or the Goat; full tilt, he comes
Title:  rushing, and headlong we are tossed; when Aquarius, or the
Title:  Water-bearer, pours out his whole deluge and drowns us; and to wind
Title:  up with Pisces, or the Fishes, we sleep.  There's a sermon now, writ
Title:  in high heaven, and the sun goes through it every year, and yet comes
Title:  out of it all alive and hearty.  Jollily he, aloft there, wheels
Title:  through toil and trouble; and so, alow here, does jolly Stubb.  Oh,
Title:  jolly's the word for aye!  Adieu, Doubloon!  But stop; here comes
Title:  little King-Post; dodge round the try-works, now, and let's hear what
Title:  he'll have to say.  There; he's before it; he'll out with something
Title:  presently.  So, so; he's beginning."
Title:  
Title:  "I see nothing here, but a round thing made of gold, and whoever
Title:  raises a certain whale, this round thing belongs to him.  So, what's
Title:  all this staring been about?  It is worth sixteen dollars, that's
Title:  true; and at two cents the cigar, that's nine hundred and sixty
Title:  cigars.  I won't smoke dirty pipes like Stubb, but I like cigars, and
Title:  here's nine hundred and sixty of them; so here goes Flask aloft to
Title:  spy 'em out."
Title:  
Title:  "Shall I call that wise or foolish, now; if it be really wise it has
Title:  a foolish look to it; yet, if it be really foolish, then has it a
Title:  sort of wiseish look to it.  But, avast; here comes our old
Title:  Manxman--the old hearse-driver, he must have been, that is, before he
Title:  took to the sea.  He luffs up before the doubloon; halloa, and goes
Title:  round on the other side of the mast; why, there's a horse-shoe nailed
Title:  on that side; and now he's back again; what does that mean?  Hark!
Title:  he's muttering--voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill.  Prick ears,
Title:  and listen!"
Title:  
Title:  "If the White Whale be raised, it must be in a month and a day, when
Title:  the sun stands in some one of these signs.  I've studied signs, and
Title:  know their marks; they were taught me two score years ago, by the old
Title:  witch in Copenhagen.  Now, in what sign will the sun then be?  The
Title:  horse-shoe sign; for there it is, right opposite the gold.  And
Title:  what's the horse-shoe sign?  The lion is the horse-shoe sign--the
Title:  roaring and devouring lion.  Ship, old ship! my old head shakes to
Title:  think of thee."
Title:  
Title:  "There's another rendering now; but still one text.  All sorts of men
Title:  in one kind of world, you see.  Dodge again! here comes Queequeg--all
Title:  tattooing--looks like the signs of the Zodiac himself.  What says the
Title:  Cannibal?  As I live he's comparing notes; looking at his thigh bone;
Title:  thinks the sun is in the thigh, or in the calf, or in the bowels, I
Title:  suppose, as the old women talk Surgeon's Astronomy in the back
Title:  country.  And by Jove, he's found something there in the vicinity of
Title:  his thigh--I guess it's Sagittarius, or the Archer.  No: he don't
Title:  know what to make of the doubloon; he takes it for an old button off
Title:  some king's trowsers.  But, aside again! here comes that ghost-devil,
Title:  Fedallah; tail coiled out of sight as usual, oakum in the toes of his
Title:  pumps as usual.  What does he say, with that look of his?  Ah, only
Title:  makes a sign to the sign and bows himself; there is a sun on the
Title:  coin--fire worshipper, depend upon it.  Ho! more and more.  This way
Title:  comes Pip--poor boy! would he had died, or I; he's half horrible to
Title:  me.  He too has been watching all of these interpreters--myself
Title:  included--and look now, he comes to read, with that unearthly idiot
Title:  face.  Stand away again and hear him.  Hark!"
Title:  
Title:  "I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look."
Title:  
Title:  "Upon my soul, he's been studying Murray's Grammar!  Improving his
Title:  mind, poor fellow!  But what's that he says now--hist!"
Title:  
Title:  "I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look."
Title:  
Title:  "Why, he's getting it by heart--hist! again."
Title:  
Title:  "I look, you look, he looks; we look, ye look, they look."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, that's funny."
Title:  
Title:  "And I, you, and he; and we, ye, and they, are all bats; and I'm a
Title:  crow, especially when I stand a'top of this pine tree here.  Caw!
Title:  caw! caw! caw! caw! caw!  Ain't I a crow?  And where's the
Title:  scare-crow?  There he stands; two bones stuck into a pair of old
Title:  trowsers, and two more poked into the sleeves of an old jacket."
Title:  
Title:  "Wonder if he means me?--complimentary!--poor lad!--I could go hang
Title:  myself.  Any way, for the present, I'll quit Pip's vicinity.  I can
Title:  stand the rest, for they have plain wits; but he's too crazy-witty
Title:  for my sanity.  So, so, I leave him muttering."
Title:  
Title:  "Here's the ship's navel, this doubloon here, and they are all on
Title:  fire to unscrew it.  But, unscrew your navel, and what's the
Title:  consequence?  Then again, if it stays here, that is ugly, too, for
Title:  when aught's nailed to the mast it's a sign that things grow
Title:  desperate.  Ha, ha! old Ahab! the White Whale; he'll nail ye!  This
Title:  is a pine tree.  My father, in old Tolland county, cut down a pine
Title:  tree once, and found a silver ring grown over in it; some old
Title:  darkey's wedding ring.  How did it get there?  And so they'll say in
Title:  the resurrection, when they come to fish up this old mast, and find a
Title:  doubloon lodged in it, with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark.  Oh,
Title:  the gold! the precious, precious, gold! the green miser'll hoard ye
Title:  soon!  Hish! hish!  God goes 'mong the worlds blackberrying.  Cook!
Title:  ho, cook! and cook us!  Jenny! hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, Jenny, Jenny!
Title:  and get your hoe-cake done!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 100
Title:  
Title:  Leg and Arm.
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod, of Nantucket, Meets the Samuel Enderby, of London.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Ship, ahoy!  Hast seen the White Whale?"
Title:  
Title:  So cried Ahab, once more hailing a ship showing English colours,
Title:  bearing down under the stern.  Trumpet to mouth, the old man was
Title:  standing in his hoisted quarter-boat, his ivory leg plainly revealed
Title:  to the stranger captain, who was carelessly reclining in his own
Title:  boat's bow.  He was a darkly-tanned, burly, good-natured,
Title:  fine-looking man, of sixty or thereabouts, dressed in a spacious
Title:  roundabout, that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth; and
Title:  one empty arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered
Title:  arm of a hussar's surcoat.
Title:  
Title:  "Hast seen the White Whale!"
Title:  
Title:  "See you this?" and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden
Title:  it, he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone, terminating in a
Title:  wooden head like a mallet.
Title:  
Title:  "Man my boat!" cried Ahab, impetuously, and tossing about the oars
Title:  near him--"Stand by to lower!"
Title:  
Title:  In less than a minute, without quitting his little craft, he and his
Title:  crew were dropped to the water, and were soon alongside of the
Title:  stranger.  But here a curious difficulty presented itself.  In the
Title:  excitement of the moment, Ahab had forgotten that since the loss of
Title:  his leg he had never once stepped on board of any vessel at sea but
Title:  his own, and then it was always by an ingenious and very handy
Title:  mechanical contrivance peculiar to the Pequod, and a thing not to be
Title:  rigged and shipped in any other vessel at a moment's warning.  Now,
Title:  it is no very easy matter for anybody--except those who are almost
Title:  hourly used to it, like whalemen--to clamber up a ship's side from a
Title:  boat on the open sea; for the great swells now lift the boat high up
Title:  towards the bulwarks, and then instantaneously drop it half way down
Title:  to the kelson.  So, deprived of one leg, and the strange ship of
Title:  course being altogether unsupplied with the kindly invention, Ahab
Title:  now found himself abjectly reduced to a clumsy landsman again;
Title:  hopelessly eyeing the uncertain changeful height he could hardly hope
Title:  to attain.
Title:  
Title:  It has before been hinted, perhaps, that every little untoward
Title:  circumstance that befell him, and which indirectly sprang from his
Title:  luckless mishap, almost invariably irritated or exasperated Ahab.
Title:  And in the present instance, all this was heightened by the sight of
Title:  the two officers of the strange ship, leaning over the side, by the
Title:  perpendicular ladder of nailed cleets there, and swinging towards him
Title:  a pair of tastefully-ornamented man-ropes; for at first they did not
Title:  seem to bethink them that a one-legged man must be too much of a
Title:  cripple to use their sea bannisters.  But this awkwardness only
Title:  lasted a minute, because the strange captain, observing at a glance
Title:  how affairs stood, cried out, "I see, I see!--avast heaving there!
Title:  Jump, boys, and swing over the cutting-tackle."
Title:  
Title:  As good luck would have it, they had had a whale alongside a day or
Title:  two previous, and the great tackles were still aloft, and the massive
Title:  curved blubber-hook, now clean and dry, was still attached to the
Title:  end.  This was quickly lowered to Ahab, who at once comprehending it
Title:  all, slid his solitary thigh into the curve of the hook (it was like
Title:  sitting in the fluke of an anchor, or the crotch of an apple tree),
Title:  and then giving the word, held himself fast, and at the same time
Title:  also helped to hoist his own weight, by pulling hand-over-hand upon
Title:  one of the running parts of the tackle.  Soon he was carefully swung
Title:  inside the high bulwarks, and gently landed upon the capstan head.
Title:  With his ivory arm frankly thrust forth in welcome, the other captain
Title:  advanced, and Ahab, putting out his ivory leg, and crossing the ivory
Title:  arm (like two sword-fish blades) cried out in his walrus way, "Aye,
Title:  aye, hearty! let us shake bones together!--an arm and a leg!--an arm
Title:  that never can shrink, d'ye see; and a leg that never can run.  Where
Title:  did'st thou see the White Whale?--how long ago?"
Title:  
Title:  "The White Whale," said the Englishman, pointing his ivory arm
Title:  towards the East, and taking a rueful sight along it, as if it had
Title:  been a telescope; "there I saw him, on the Line, last season."
Title:  
Title:  "And he took that arm off, did he?" asked Ahab, now sliding down from
Title:  the capstan, and resting on the Englishman's shoulder, as he did so.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, he was the cause of it, at least; and that leg, too?"
Title:  
Title:  "Spin me the yarn," said Ahab; "how was it?"
Title:  
Title:  "It was the first time in my life that I ever cruised on the Line,"
Title:  began the Englishman.  "I was ignorant of the White Whale at that
Title:  time.  Well, one day we lowered for a pod of four or five whales, and
Title:  my boat fastened to one of them; a regular circus horse he was, too,
Title:  that went milling and milling round so, that my boat's crew could
Title:  only trim dish, by sitting all their sterns on the outer gunwale.
Title:  Presently up breaches from the bottom of the sea a bouncing great
Title:  whale, with a milky-white head and hump, all crows' feet and
Title:  wrinkles."
Title:  
Title:  "It was he, it was he!" cried Ahab, suddenly letting out his
Title:  suspended breath.
Title:  
Title:  "And harpoons sticking in near his starboard fin."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye--they were mine--MY irons," cried Ahab, exultingly--"but
Title:  on!"
Title:  
Title:  "Give me a chance, then," said the Englishman, good-humoredly.
Title:  "Well, this old great-grandfather, with the white head and hump, runs
Title:  all afoam into the pod, and goes to snapping furiously at my
Title:  fast-line!
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, I see!--wanted to part it; free the fast-fish--an old trick--I
Title:  know him."
Title:  
Title:  "How it was exactly," continued the one-armed commander, "I do not
Title:  know; but in biting the line, it got foul of his teeth, caught there
Title:  somehow; but we didn't know it then; so that when we afterwards
Title:  pulled on the line, bounce we came plump on to his hump! instead of
Title:  the other whale's; that went off to windward, all fluking.  Seeing
Title:  how matters stood, and what a noble great whale it was--the noblest
Title:  and biggest I ever saw, sir, in my life--I resolved to capture him,
Title:  spite of the boiling rage he seemed to be in.  And thinking the
Title:  hap-hazard line would get loose, or the tooth it was tangled to
Title:  might draw (for I have a devil of a boat's crew for a pull on a
Title:  whale-line); seeing all this, I say, I jumped into my first mate's
Title:  boat--Mr. Mounttop's here (by the way, Captain--Mounttop;
Title:  Mounttop--the captain);--as I was saying, I jumped into Mounttop's
Title:  boat, which, d'ye see, was gunwale and gunwale with mine, then; and
Title:  snatching the first harpoon, let this old great-grandfather have it.
Title:  But, Lord, look you, sir--hearts and souls alive, man--the next
Title:  instant, in a jiff, I was blind as a bat--both eyes out--all befogged
Title:  and bedeadened with black foam--the whale's tail looming straight up
Title:  out of it, perpendicular in the air, like a marble steeple.  No use
Title:  sterning all, then; but as I was groping at midday, with a blinding
Title:  sun, all crown-jewels; as I was groping, I say, after the second
Title:  iron, to toss it overboard--down comes the tail like a Lima tower,
Title:  cutting my boat in two, leaving each half in splinters; and, flukes
Title:  first, the white hump backed through the wreck, as though it was all
Title:  chips.  We all struck out.  To escape his terrible flailings, I
Title:  seized hold of my harpoon-pole sticking in him, and for a moment
Title:  clung to that like a sucking fish.  But a combing sea dashed me off,
Title:  and at the same instant, the fish, taking one good dart forwards,
Title:  went down like a flash; and the barb of that cursed second iron
Title:  towing along near me caught me here" (clapping his hand just below
Title:  his shoulder); "yes, caught me just here, I say, and bore me down to
Title:  Hell's flames, I was thinking; when, when, all of a sudden, thank the
Title:  good God, the barb ript its way along the flesh--clear along the
Title:  whole length of my arm--came out nigh my wrist, and up I
Title:  floated;--and that gentleman there will tell you the rest (by the
Title:  way, captain--Dr. Bunger, ship's surgeon: Bunger, my lad,--the
Title:  captain).  Now, Bunger boy, spin your part of the yarn."
Title:  
Title:  The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out, had been all
Title:  the time standing near them, with nothing specific visible, to denote
Title:  his gentlemanly rank on board.  His face was an exceedingly round but
Title:  sober one; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt, and
Title:  patched trowsers; and had thus far been dividing his attention
Title:  between a marlingspike he held in one hand, and a pill-box held in
Title:  the other, occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbs
Title:  of the two crippled captains.  But, at his superior's introduction of
Title:  him to Ahab, he politely bowed, and straightway went on to do his
Title:  captain's bidding.
Title:  
Title:  "It was a shocking bad wound," began the whale-surgeon; "and, taking
Title:  my advice, Captain Boomer here, stood our old Sammy--"
Title:  
Title:  "Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship," interrupted the one-armed
Title:  captain, addressing Ahab; "go on, boy."
Title:  
Title:  "Stood our old Sammy off to the northward, to get out of the blazing
Title:  hot weather there on the Line.  But it was no use--I did all I could;
Title:  sat up with him nights; was very severe with him in the matter of
Title:  diet--"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, very severe!" chimed in the patient himself; then suddenly
Title:  altering his voice, "Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night,
Title:  till he couldn't see to put on the bandages; and sending me to bed,
Title:  half seas over, about three o'clock in the morning.  Oh, ye stars! he
Title:  sat up with me indeed, and was very severe in my diet.  Oh! a great
Title:  watcher, and very dietetically severe, is Dr. Bunger. (Bunger, you
Title:  dog, laugh out! why don't ye?  You know you're a precious jolly
Title:  rascal.) But, heave ahead, boy, I'd rather be killed by you than kept
Title:  alive by any other man."
Title:  
Title:  "My captain, you must have ere this perceived, respected sir"--said
Title:  the imperturbable godly-looking Bunger, slightly bowing to Ahab--"is
Title:  apt to be facetious at times; he spins us many clever things of that
Title:  sort.  But I may as well say--en passant, as the French remark--that
Title:  I myself--that is to say, Jack Bunger, late of the reverend
Title:  clergy--am a strict total abstinence man; I never drink--"
Title:  
Title:  "Water!" cried the captain; "he never drinks it; it's a sort of fits
Title:  to him; fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia; but go on--go on
Title:  with the arm story."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, I may as well," said the surgeon, coolly.  "I was about
Title:  observing, sir, before Captain Boomer's facetious interruption, that
Title:  spite of my best and severest endeavors, the wound kept getting worse
Title:  and worse; the truth was, sir, it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon
Title:  ever saw; more than two feet and several inches long.  I measured it
Title:  with the lead line.  In short, it grew black; I knew what was
Title:  threatened, and off it came.  But I had no hand in shipping that
Title:  ivory arm there; that thing is against all rule"--pointing at it with
Title:  the marlingspike--"that is the captain's work, not mine; he ordered
Title:  the carpenter to make it; he had that club-hammer there put to the
Title:  end, to knock some one's brains out with, I suppose, as he tried mine
Title:  once.  He flies into diabolical passions sometimes.  Do ye see this
Title:  dent, sir"--removing his hat, and brushing aside his hair, and
Title:  exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull, but which bore not the
Title:  slightest scarry trace, or any token of ever having been a
Title:  wound--"Well, the captain there will tell you how that came here;
Title:  he knows."
Title:  
Title:  "No, I don't," said the captain, "but his mother did; he was born
Title:  with it.  Oh, you solemn rogue, you--you Bunger! was there ever such
Title:  another Bunger in the watery world?  Bunger, when you die, you ought
Title:  to die in pickle, you dog; you should be preserved to future ages,
Title:  you rascal."
Title:  
Title:  "What became of the White Whale?" now cried Ahab, who thus far had
Title:  been impatiently listening to this by-play between the two
Title:  Englishmen.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!" cried the one-armed captain, "oh, yes!  Well; after he sounded,
Title:  we didn't see him again for some time; in fact, as I before hinted, I
Title:  didn't then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick,
Title:  till some time afterwards, when coming back to the Line, we heard
Title:  about Moby Dick--as some call him--and then I knew it was he."
Title:  
Title:  "Did'st thou cross his wake again?"
Title:  
Title:  "Twice."
Title:  
Title:  "But could not fasten?"
Title:  
Title:  "Didn't want to try to: ain't one limb enough?  What should I do
Title:  without this other arm?  And I'm thinking Moby Dick doesn't bite so
Title:  much as he swallows."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, then," interrupted Bunger, "give him your left arm for bait to
Title:  get the right.  Do you know, gentlemen"--very gravely and
Title:  mathematically bowing to each Captain in succession--"Do you know,
Title:  gentlemen, that the digestive organs of the whale are so inscrutably
Title:  constructed by Divine Providence, that it is quite impossible for him
Title:  to completely digest even a man's arm?  And he knows it too.  So that
Title:  what you take for the White Whale's malice is only his awkwardness.
Title:  For he never means to swallow a single limb; he only thinks to
Title:  terrify by feints.  But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow,
Title:  formerly a patient of mine in Ceylon, that making believe swallow
Title:  jack-knives, once upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest,
Title:  and there it stayed for a twelvemonth or more; when I gave him an
Title:  emetic, and he heaved it up in small tacks, d'ye see.  No possible
Title:  way for him to digest that jack-knife, and fully incorporate it into
Title:  his general bodily system.  Yes, Captain Boomer, if you are quick
Title:  enough about it, and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the
Title:  privilege of giving decent burial to the other, why in that case
Title:  the arm is yours; only let the whale have another chance at you
Title:  shortly, that's all."
Title:  
Title:  "No, thank ye, Bunger," said the English Captain, "he's welcome to
Title:  the arm he has, since I can't help it, and didn't know him then; but
Title:  not to another one.  No more White Whales for me; I've lowered for
Title:  him once, and that has satisfied me.  There would be great glory in
Title:  killing him, I know that; and there is a ship-load of precious sperm
Title:  in him, but, hark ye, he's best let alone; don't you think so,
Title:  Captain?"--glancing at the ivory leg.
Title:  
Title:  "He is.  But he will still be hunted, for all that.  What is best let
Title:  alone, that accursed thing is not always what least allures.  He's
Title:  all a magnet!  How long since thou saw'st him last?  Which way
Title:  heading?"
Title:  
Title:  "Bless my soul, and curse the foul fiend's," cried Bunger, stoopingly
Title:  walking round Ahab, and like a dog, strangely snuffing; "this man's
Title:  blood--bring the thermometer!--it's at the boiling point!--his pulse
Title:  makes these planks beat!--sir!"--taking a lancet from his pocket, and
Title:  drawing near to Ahab's arm.
Title:  
Title:  "Avast!" roared Ahab, dashing him against the bulwarks--"Man the
Title:  boat!  Which way heading?"
Title:  
Title:  "Good God!" cried the English Captain, to whom the question was put.
Title:  "What's the matter?  He was heading east, I think.--Is your Captain
Title:  crazy?" whispering Fedallah.
Title:  
Title:  But Fedallah, putting a finger on his lip, slid over the bulwarks to
Title:  take the boat's steering oar, and Ahab, swinging the cutting-tackle
Title:  towards him, commanded the ship's sailors to stand by to lower.
Title:  
Title:  In a moment he was standing in the boat's stern, and the Manilla men
Title:  were springing to their oars.  In vain the English Captain hailed
Title:  him.  With back to the stranger ship, and face set like a flint to
Title:  his own, Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 101
Title:  
Title:  The Decanter.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Ere the English ship fades from sight, be it set down here, that she
Title:  hailed from London, and was named after the late Samuel Enderby,
Title:  merchant of that city, the original of the famous whaling house of
Title:  Enderby & Sons; a house which in my poor whaleman's opinion, comes
Title:  not far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons, in
Title:  point of real historical interest.  How long, prior to the year of
Title:  our Lord 1775, this great whaling house was in existence, my numerous
Title:  fish-documents do not make plain; but in that year (1775) it fitted
Title:  out the first English ships that ever regularly hunted the Sperm
Title:  Whale; though for some score of years previous (ever since 1726) our
Title:  valiant Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket and the Vineyard had in large
Title:  fleets pursued that Leviathan, but only in the North and South
Title:  Atlantic: not elsewhere.  Be it distinctly recorded here, that the
Title:  Nantucketers were the first among mankind to harpoon with civilized
Title:  steel the great Sperm Whale; and that for half a century they were
Title:  the only people of the whole globe who so harpooned him.
Title:  
Title:  In 1778, a fine ship, the Amelia, fitted out for the express purpose,
Title:  and at the sole charge of the vigorous Enderbys, boldly rounded Cape
Title:  Horn, and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat of
Title:  any sort in the great South Sea.  The voyage was a skilful and lucky
Title:  one; and returning to her berth with her hold full of the precious
Title:  sperm, the Amelia's example was soon followed by other ships, English
Title:  and American, and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the Pacific
Title:  were thrown open.  But not content with this good deed, the
Title:  indefatigable house again bestirred itself: Samuel and all his
Title:  Sons--how many, their mother only knows--and under their immediate
Title:  auspices, and partly, I think, at their expense, the British
Title:  government was induced to send the sloop-of-war Rattler on a whaling
Title:  voyage of discovery into the South Sea.  Commanded by a naval
Title:  Post-Captain, the Rattler made a rattling voyage of it, and did some
Title:  service; how much does not appear.  But this is not all.  In 1819,
Title:  the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship of their own, to go
Title:  on a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan.  That ship--well
Title:  called the "Syren"--made a noble experimental cruise; and it was thus
Title:  that the great Japanese Whaling Ground first became generally known.
Title:  The Syren in this famous voyage was commanded by a Captain Coffin, a
Title:  Nantucketer.
Title:  
Title:  All honour to the Enderbies, therefore, whose house, I think, exists
Title:  to the present day; though doubtless the original Samuel must long
Title:  ago have slipped his cable for the great South Sea of the other
Title:  world.
Title:  
Title:  The ship named after him was worthy of the honour, being a very fast
Title:  sailer and a noble craft every way.  I boarded her once at midnight
Title:  somewhere off the Patagonian coast, and drank good flip down in the
Title:  forecastle.  It was a fine gam we had, and they were all
Title:  trumps--every soul on board.  A short life to them, and a jolly
Title:  death.  And that fine gam I had--long, very long after old Ahab
Title:  touched her planks with his ivory heel--it minds me of the noble,
Title:  solid, Saxon hospitality of that ship; and may my parson forget me,
Title:  and the devil remember me, if I ever lose sight of it.  Flip?  Did I
Title:  say we had flip?  Yes, and we flipped it at the rate of ten gallons
Title:  the hour; and when the squall came (for it's squally off there by
Title:  Patagonia), and all hands--visitors and all--were called to reef
Title:  topsails, we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each other aloft
Title:  in bowlines; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of our jackets into
Title:  the sails, so that we hung there, reefed fast in the howling gale, a
Title:  warning example to all drunken tars.  However, the masts did not go
Title:  overboard; and by and by we scrambled down, so sober, that we had to
Title:  pass the flip again, though the savage salt spray bursting down the
Title:  forecastle scuttle, rather too much diluted and pickled it to my
Title:  taste.
Title:  
Title:  The beef was fine--tough, but with body in it.  They said it was
Title:  bull-beef; others, that it was dromedary beef; but I do not know, for
Title:  certain, how that was.  They had dumplings too; small, but
Title:  substantial, symmetrically globular, and indestructible dumplings.  I
Title:  fancied that you could feel them, and roll them about in you after
Title:  they were swallowed.  If you stooped over too far forward, you risked
Title:  their pitching out of you like billiard-balls.  The bread--but that
Title:  couldn't be helped; besides, it was an anti-scorbutic; in short, the
Title:  bread contained the only fresh fare they had.  But the forecastle was
Title:  not very light, and it was very easy to step over into a dark corner
Title:  when you ate it.  But all in all, taking her from truck to helm,
Title:  considering the dimensions of the cook's boilers, including his own
Title:  live parchment boilers; fore and aft, I say, the Samuel Enderby was a
Title:  jolly ship; of good fare and plenty; fine flip and strong; crack
Title:  fellows all, and capital from boot heels to hat-band.
Title:  
Title:  But why was it, think ye, that the Samuel Enderby, and some other
Title:  English whalers I know of--not all though--were such famous,
Title:  hospitable ships; that passed round the beef, and the bread, and the
Title:  can, and the joke; and were not soon weary of eating, and drinking,
Title:  and laughing?  I will tell you.  The abounding good cheer of these
Title:  English whalers is matter for historical research.  Nor have I been
Title:  at all sparing of historical whale research, when it has seemed
Title:  needed.
Title:  
Title:  The English were preceded in the whale fishery by the Hollanders,
Title:  Zealanders, and Danes; from whom they derived many terms still extant
Title:  in the fishery; and what is yet more, their fat old fashions,
Title:  touching plenty to eat and drink.  For, as a general thing, the
Title:  English merchant-ship scrimps her crew; but not so the English
Title:  whaler.  Hence, in the English, this thing of whaling good cheer is
Title:  not normal and natural, but incidental and particular; and,
Title:  therefore, must have some special origin, which is here pointed out,
Title:  and will be still further elucidated.
Title:  
Title:  During my researches in the Leviathanic histories, I stumbled upon an
Title:  ancient Dutch volume, which, by the musty whaling smell of it, I knew
Title:  must be about whalers.  The title was, "Dan Coopman," wherefore I
Title:  concluded that this must be the invaluable memoirs of some Amsterdam
Title:  cooper in the fishery, as every whale ship must carry its cooper.  I
Title:  was reinforced in this opinion by seeing that it was the production
Title:  of one "Fitz Swackhammer."  But my friend Dr. Snodhead, a very
Title:  learned man, professor of Low Dutch and High German in the college of
Title:  Santa Claus and St. Pott's, to whom I handed the work for
Title:  translation, giving him a box of sperm candles for his trouble--this
Title:  same Dr. Snodhead, so soon as he spied the book, assured me that "Dan
Title:  Coopman" did not mean "The Cooper," but "The Merchant."  In short,
Title:  this ancient and learned Low Dutch book treated of the commerce of
Title:  Holland; and, among other subjects, contained a very interesting
Title:  account of its whale fishery.  And in this chapter it was, headed,
Title:  "Smeer," or "Fat," that I found a long detailed list of the outfits
Title:  for the larders and cellars of 180 sail of Dutch whalemen; from which
Title:  list, as translated by Dr. Snodhead, I transcribe the following:
Title:  
Title:  400,000 lbs. of beef.
Title:  60,000 lbs. Friesland pork.
Title:  150,000 lbs. of stock fish.
Title:  550,000 lbs. of biscuit.
Title:  72,000 lbs. of soft bread.
Title:  2,800 firkins of butter.
Title:  20,000 lbs. Texel & Leyden cheese.
Title:  144,000 lbs. cheese (probably an inferior article).
Title:  550 ankers of Geneva.
Title:  10,800 barrels of beer.
Title:  
Title:  Most statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading; not so in
Title:  the present case, however, where the reader is flooded with whole
Title:  pipes, barrels, quarts, and gills of good gin and good cheer.
Title:  
Title:  At the time, I devoted three days to the studious digesting of all
Title:  this beer, beef, and bread, during which many profound thoughts were
Title:  incidentally suggested to me, capable of a transcendental and
Title:  Platonic application; and, furthermore, I compiled supplementary
Title:  tables of my own, touching the probable quantity of stock-fish, etc.,
Title:  consumed by every Low Dutch harpooneer in that ancient Greenland and
Title:  Spitzbergen whale fishery.  In the first place, the amount of butter,
Title:  and Texel and Leyden cheese consumed, seems amazing.  I impute it,
Title:  though, to their naturally unctuous natures, being rendered still
Title:  more unctuous by the nature of their vocation, and especially by
Title:  their pursuing their game in those frigid Polar Seas, on the very
Title:  coasts of that Esquimaux country where the convivial natives pledge
Title:  each other in bumpers of train oil.
Title:  
Title:  The quantity of beer, too, is very large, 10,800 barrels.  Now,
Title:  as those polar fisheries could only be prosecuted in the short summer
Title:  of that climate, so that the whole cruise of one of these Dutch
Title:  whalemen, including the short voyage to and from the Spitzbergen sea,
Title:  did not much exceed three months, say, and reckoning 30 men to each
Title:  of their fleet of 180 sail, we have 5,400 Low Dutch seamen in all;
Title:  therefore, I say, we have precisely two barrels of beer per man, for
Title:  a twelve weeks' allowance, exclusive of his fair proportion of that
Title:  550 ankers of gin.  Now, whether these gin and beer harpooneers, so
Title:  fuddled as one might fancy them to have been, were the right sort of
Title:  men to stand up in a boat's head, and take good aim at flying whales;
Title:  this would seem somewhat improbable.  Yet they did aim at them, and
Title:  hit them too.  But this was very far North, be it remembered, where
Title:  beer agrees well with the constitution; upon the Equator, in our
Title:  southern fishery, beer would be apt to make the harpooneer sleepy at
Title:  the mast-head and boozy in his boat; and grievous loss might ensue to
Title:  Nantucket and New Bedford.
Title:  
Title:  But no more; enough has been said to show that the old Dutch whalers
Title:  of two or three centuries ago were high livers; and that the English
Title:  whalers have not neglected so excellent an example.  For, say they,
Title:  when cruising in an empty ship, if you can get nothing better out of
Title:  the world, get a good dinner out of it, at least.  And this empties
Title:  the decanter.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 102
Title:  
Title:  A Bower in the Arsacides.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Hitherto, in descriptively treating of the Sperm Whale, I have
Title:  chiefly dwelt upon the marvels of his outer aspect; or separately and
Title:  in detail upon some few interior structural features.  But to a large
Title:  and thorough sweeping comprehension of him, it behooves me now to
Title:  unbutton him still further, and untagging the points of his hose,
Title:  unbuckling his garters, and casting loose the hooks and the eyes of
Title:  the joints of his innermost bones, set him before you in his
Title:  ultimatum; that is to say, in his unconditional skeleton.
Title:  
Title:  But how now, Ishmael?  How is it, that you, a mere oarsman in the
Title:  fishery, pretend to know aught about the subterranean parts of the
Title:  whale?  Did erudite Stubb, mounted upon your capstan, deliver
Title:  lectures on the anatomy of the Cetacea; and by help of the windlass,
Title:  hold up a specimen rib for exhibition?  Explain thyself, Ishmael.
Title:  Can you land a full-grown whale on your deck for examination, as a
Title:  cook dishes a roast-pig?  Surely not.  A veritable witness have you
Title:  hitherto been, Ishmael; but have a care how you seize the privilege
Title:  of Jonah alone; the privilege of discoursing upon the joists and
Title:  beams; the rafters, ridge-pole, sleepers, and under-pinnings, making
Title:  up the frame-work of leviathan; and belike of the tallow-vats,
Title:  dairy-rooms, butteries, and cheeseries in his bowels.
Title:  
Title:  I confess, that since Jonah, few whalemen have penetrated very far
Title:  beneath the skin of the adult whale; nevertheless, I have been
Title:  blessed with an opportunity to dissect him in miniature.  In a ship I
Title:  belonged to, a small cub Sperm Whale was once bodily hoisted to the
Title:  deck for his poke or bag, to make sheaths for the barbs of the
Title:  harpoons, and for the heads of the lances.  Think you I let that
Title:  chance go, without using my boat-hatchet and jack-knife, and breaking
Title:  the seal and reading all the contents of that young cub?
Title:  
Title:  And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in their
Title:  gigantic, full grown development, for that rare knowledge I am
Title:  indebted to my late royal friend Tranquo, king of Tranque, one of
Title:  the Arsacides.  For being at Tranque, years ago, when attached to the
Title:  trading-ship Dey of Algiers, I was invited to spend part of the
Title:  Arsacidean holidays with the lord of Tranque, at his retired palm
Title:  villa at Pupella; a sea-side glen not very far distant from what our
Title:  sailors called Bamboo-Town, his capital.
Title:  
Title:  Among many other fine qualities, my royal friend Tranquo, being
Title:  gifted with a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu, had
Title:  brought together in Pupella whatever rare things the more ingenious
Title:  of his people could invent; chiefly carved woods of wonderful
Title:  devices, chiselled shells, inlaid spears, costly paddles, aromatic
Title:  canoes; and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders, the
Title:  wonder-freighted, tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores.
Title:  
Title:  Chief among these latter was a great Sperm Whale, which, after an
Title:  unusually long raging gale, had been found dead and stranded, with
Title:  his head against a cocoa-nut tree, whose plumage-like, tufted
Title:  droopings seemed his verdant jet.  When the vast body had at last
Title:  been stripped of its fathom-deep enfoldings, and the bones become
Title:  dust dry in the sun, then the skeleton was carefully transported up
Title:  the Pupella glen, where a grand temple of lordly palms now sheltered
Title:  it.
Title:  
Title:  The ribs were hung with trophies; the vertebrae were carved with
Title:  Arsacidean annals, in strange hieroglyphics; in the skull, the
Title:  priests kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame, so that the mystic
Title:  head again sent forth its vapoury spout; while, suspended from a
Title:  bough, the terrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees, like
Title:  the hair-hung sword that so affrighted Damocles.
Title:  
Title:  It was a wondrous sight.  The wood was green as mosses of the Icy
Title:  Glen; the trees stood high and haughty, feeling their living sap; the
Title:  industrious earth beneath was as a weaver's loom, with a gorgeous
Title:  carpet on it, whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp and
Title:  woof, and the living flowers the figures.  All the trees, with all
Title:  their laden branches; all the shrubs, and ferns, and grasses; the
Title:  message-carrying air; all these unceasingly were active.  Through the
Title:  lacings of the leaves, the great sun seemed a flying shuttle weaving
Title:  the unwearied verdure.  Oh, busy weaver! unseen weaver!--pause!--one
Title:  word!--whither flows the fabric? what palace may it deck? wherefore
Title:  all these ceaseless toilings?  Speak, weaver!--stay thy hand!--but
Title:  one single word with thee!  Nay--the shuttle flies--the figures float
Title:  from forth the loom; the freshet-rushing carpet for ever slides
Title:  away.  The weaver-god, he weaves; and by that weaving is he deafened,
Title:  that he hears no mortal voice; and by that humming, we, too, who look
Title:  on the loom are deafened; and only when we escape it shall we hear
Title:  the thousand voices that speak through it.  For even so it is in all
Title:  material factories.  The spoken words that are inaudible among the
Title:  flying spindles; those same words are plainly heard without the
Title:  walls, bursting from the opened casements.  Thereby have villainies
Title:  been detected.  Ah, mortal! then, be heedful; for so, in all this din
Title:  of the great world's loom, thy subtlest thinkings may be overheard
Title:  afar.
Title:  
Title:  Now, amid the green, life-restless loom of that Arsacidean wood, the
Title:  great, white, worshipped skeleton lay lounging--a gigantic idler!
Title:  Yet, as the ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummed
Title:  around him, the mighty idler seemed the cunning weaver; himself all
Title:  woven over with the vines; every month assuming greener, fresher
Title:  verdure; but himself a skeleton.  Life folded Death; Death trellised
Title:  Life; the grim god wived with youthful Life, and begat him
Title:  curly-headed glories.
Title:  
Title:  Now, when with royal Tranquo I visited this wondrous whale, and saw
Title:  the skull an altar, and the artificial smoke ascending from where the
Title:  real jet had issued, I marvelled that the king should regard a chapel
Title:  as an object of vertu.  He laughed.  But more I marvelled that the
Title:  priests should swear that smoky jet of his was genuine.  To and fro I
Title:  paced before this skeleton--brushed the vines aside--broke through
Title:  the ribs--and with a ball of Arsacidean twine, wandered, eddied long
Title:  amid its many winding, shaded colonnades and arbours.  But soon my
Title:  line was out; and following it back, I emerged from the opening where I
Title:  entered.  I saw no living thing within; naught was there but bones.
Title:  
Title:  Cutting me a green measuring-rod, I once more dived within the
Title:  skeleton.  From their arrow-slit in the skull, the priests perceived
Title:  me taking the altitude of the final rib, "How now!" they shouted;
Title:  "Dar'st thou measure this our god!  That's for us."  "Aye,
Title:  priests--well, how long do ye make him, then?"  But hereupon a fierce
Title:  contest rose among them, concerning feet and inches; they cracked
Title:  each other's sconces with their yard-sticks--the great skull
Title:  echoed--and seizing that lucky chance, I quickly concluded my own
Title:  admeasurements.
Title:  
Title:  These admeasurements I now propose to set before you.  But first, be
Title:  it recorded, that, in this matter, I am not free to utter any fancied
Title:  measurement I please.  Because there are skeleton authorities you
Title:  can refer to, to test my accuracy.  There is a Leviathanic Museum,
Title:  they tell me, in Hull, England, one of the whaling ports of that
Title:  country, where they have some fine specimens of fin-backs and other
Title:  whales.  Likewise, I have heard that in the museum of Manchester, in
Title:  New Hampshire, they have what the proprietors call "the only perfect
Title:  specimen of a Greenland or River Whale in the United States."
Title:  Moreover, at a place in Yorkshire, England, Burton Constable by name,
Title:  a certain Sir Clifford Constable has in his possession the skeleton
Title:  of a Sperm Whale, but of moderate size, by no means of the full-grown
Title:  magnitude of my friend King Tranquo's.
Title:  
Title:  In both cases, the stranded whales to which these two skeletons
Title:  belonged, were originally claimed by their proprietors upon similar
Title:  grounds.  King Tranquo seizing his because he wanted it; and Sir
Title:  Clifford, because he was lord of the seignories of those parts.  Sir
Title:  Clifford's whale has been articulated throughout; so that, like a
Title:  great chest of drawers, you can open and shut him, in all his bony
Title:  cavities--spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan--and swing all day
Title:  upon his lower jaw.  Locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doors
Title:  and shutters; and a footman will show round future visitors with a
Title:  bunch of keys at his side.  Sir Clifford thinks of charging twopence
Title:  for a peep at the whispering gallery in the spinal column; threepence
Title:  to hear the echo in the hollow of his cerebellum; and sixpence for
Title:  the unrivalled view from his forehead.
Title:  
Title:  The skeleton dimensions I shall now proceed to set down are copied
Title:  verbatim from my right arm, where I had them tattooed; as in my wild
Title:  wanderings at that period, there was no other secure way of
Title:  preserving such valuable statistics.  But as I was crowded for space,
Title:  and wished the other parts of my body to remain a blank page for a
Title:  poem I was then composing--at least, what untattooed parts might
Title:  remain--I did not trouble myself with the odd inches; nor, indeed,
Title:  should inches at all enter into a congenial admeasurement of the
Title:  whale.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 103
Title:  
Title:  Measurement of The Whale's Skeleton.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  In the first place, I wish to lay before you a particular, plain
Title:  statement, touching the living bulk of this leviathan, whose skeleton
Title:  we are briefly to exhibit.  Such a statement may prove useful here.
Title:  
Title:  According to a careful calculation I have made, and which I partly
Title:  base upon Captain Scoresby's estimate, of seventy tons for the
Title:  largest sized Greenland whale of sixty feet in length; according to
Title:  my careful calculation, I say, a Sperm Whale of the largest
Title:  magnitude, between eighty-five and ninety feet in length, and
Title:  something less than forty feet in its fullest circumference, such a
Title:  whale will weigh at least ninety tons; so that, reckoning thirteen
Title:  men to a ton, he would considerably outweigh the combined population
Title:  of a whole village of one thousand one hundred inhabitants.
Title:  
Title:  Think you not then that brains, like yoked cattle, should be put to
Title:  this leviathan, to make him at all budge to any landsman's
Title:  imagination?
Title:  
Title:  Having already in various ways put before you his skull, spout-hole,
Title:  jaw, teeth, tail, forehead, fins, and divers other parts, I shall now
Title:  simply point out what is most interesting in the general bulk of his
Title:  unobstructed bones.  But as the colossal skull embraces so very large
Title:  a proportion of the entire extent of the skeleton; as it is by far
Title:  the most complicated part; and as nothing is to be repeated
Title:  concerning it in this chapter, you must not fail to carry it in your
Title:  mind, or under your arm, as we proceed, otherwise you will not gain a
Title:  complete notion of the general structure we are about to view.
Title:  
Title:  In length, the Sperm Whale's skeleton at Tranque measured seventy-two
Title:  Feet; so that when fully invested and extended in life, he must have
Title:  been ninety feet long; for in the whale, the skeleton loses about one
Title:  fifth in length compared with the living body.  Of this seventy-two
Title:  feet, his skull and jaw comprised some twenty feet, leaving some
Title:  fifty feet of plain back-bone.  Attached to this back-bone, for
Title:  something less than a third of its length, was the mighty circular
Title:  basket of ribs which once enclosed his vitals.
Title:  
Title:  To me this vast ivory-ribbed chest, with the long, unrelieved spine,
Title:  extending far away from it in a straight line, not a little resembled
Title:  the hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks, when only some
Title:  twenty of her naked bow-ribs are inserted, and the keel is otherwise,
Title:  for the time, but a long, disconnected timber.
Title:  
Title:  The ribs were ten on a side.  The first, to begin from the neck, was
Title:  nearly six feet long; the second, third, and fourth were each
Title:  successively longer, till you came to the climax of the fifth, or one
Title:  of the middle ribs, which measured eight feet and some inches.  From
Title:  that part, the remaining ribs diminished, till the tenth and last
Title:  only spanned five feet and some inches.  In general thickness, they
Title:  all bore a seemly correspondence to their length.  The middle ribs
Title:  were the most arched.  In some of the Arsacides they are used for
Title:  beams whereon to lay footpath bridges over small streams.
Title:  
Title:  In considering these ribs, I could not but be struck anew with the
Title:  circumstance, so variously repeated in this book, that the skeleton
Title:  of the whale is by no means the mould of his invested form.  The
Title:  largest of the Tranque ribs, one of the middle ones, occupied that
Title:  part of the fish which, in life, is greatest in depth.  Now, the
Title:  greatest depth of the invested body of this particular whale must
Title:  have been at least sixteen feet; whereas, the corresponding rib
Title:  measured but little more than eight feet.  So that this rib only
Title:  conveyed half of the true notion of the living magnitude of that
Title:  part.  Besides, for some way, where I now saw but a naked spine, all
Title:  that had been once wrapped round with tons of added bulk in flesh,
Title:  muscle, blood, and bowels.  Still more, for the ample fins, I here
Title:  saw but a few disordered joints; and in place of the weighty and
Title:  majestic, but boneless flukes, an utter blank!
Title:  
Title:  How vain and foolish, then, thought I, for timid untravelled man to
Title:  try to comprehend aright this wondrous whale, by merely poring over
Title:  his dead attenuated skeleton, stretched in this peaceful wood.  No.
Title:  Only in the heart of quickest perils; only when within the eddyings
Title:  of his angry flukes; only on the profound unbounded sea, can the
Title:  fully invested whale be truly and livingly found out.
Title:  
Title:  But the spine.  For that, the best way we can consider it is, with a
Title:  crane, to pile its bones high up on end.  No speedy enterprise.  But
Title:  now it's done, it looks much like Pompey's Pillar.
Title:  
Title:  There are forty and odd vertebrae in all, which in the skeleton are
Title:  not locked together.  They mostly lie like the great knobbed blocks
Title:  on a Gothic spire, forming solid courses of heavy masonry.  The
Title:  largest, a middle one, is in width something less than three feet,
Title:  and in depth more than four.  The smallest, where the spine tapers
Title:  away into the tail, is only two inches in width, and looks something
Title:  like a white billiard-ball.  I was told that there were still smaller
Title:  ones, but they had been lost by some little cannibal urchins, the
Title:  priest's children, who had stolen them to play marbles with.  Thus we
Title:  see how that the spine of even the hugest of living things tapers off
Title:  at last into simple child's play.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 104
Title:  
Title:  The Fossil Whale.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  From his mighty bulk the whale affords a most congenial theme whereon
Title:  to enlarge, amplify, and generally expatiate.  Would you, you could
Title:  not compress him.  By good rights he should only be treated of in
Title:  imperial folio.  Not to tell over again his furlongs from spiracle to
Title:  tail, and the yards he measures about the waist; only think of the
Title:  gigantic involutions of his intestines, where they lie in him like
Title:  great cables and hawsers coiled away in the subterranean orlop-deck
Title:  of a line-of-battle-ship.
Title:  
Title:  Since I have undertaken to manhandle this Leviathan, it behooves me
Title:  to approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the enterprise; not
Title:  overlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood, and spinning him
Title:  out to the uttermost coil of his bowels.  Having already described
Title:  him in most of his present habitatory and anatomical peculiarities,
Title:  it now remains to magnify him in an archaeological, fossiliferous,
Title:  and antediluvian point of view.  Applied to any other creature than
Title:  the Leviathan--to an ant or a flea--such portly terms might justly be
Title:  deemed unwarrantably grandiloquent.  But when Leviathan is the text,
Title:  the case is altered.  Fain am I to stagger to this emprise under
Title:  the weightiest words of the dictionary.  And here be it said, that
Title:  whenever it has been convenient to consult one in the course of these
Title:  dissertations, I have invariably used a huge quarto edition of
Title:  Johnson, expressly purchased for that purpose; because that famous
Title:  lexicographer's uncommon personal bulk more fitted him to compile a
Title:  lexicon to be used by a whale author like me.
Title:  
Title:  One often hears of writers that rise and swell with their subject,
Title:  though it may seem but an ordinary one.  How, then, with me, writing
Title:  of this Leviathan?  Unconsciously my chirography expands into placard
Title:  capitals.  Give me a condor's quill!  Give me Vesuvius' crater for an
Title:  inkstand!  Friends, hold my arms!  For in the mere act of penning my
Title:  thoughts of this Leviathan, they weary me, and make me faint with
Title:  their outreaching comprehensiveness of sweep, as if to include the
Title:  whole circle of the sciences, and all the generations of whales, and
Title:  men, and mastodons, past, present, and to come, with all the
Title:  revolving panoramas of empire on earth, and throughout the whole
Title:  universe, not excluding its suburbs.  Such, and so magnifying, is the
Title:  virtue of a large and liberal theme!  We expand to its bulk.  To
Title:  produce a mighty book, you must choose a mighty theme.  No great and
Title:  enduring volume can ever be written on the flea, though many there be
Title:  who have tried it.
Title:  
Title:  Ere entering upon the subject of Fossil Whales, I present my
Title:  credentials as a geologist, by stating that in my miscellaneous time
Title:  I have been a stone-mason, and also a great digger of ditches,
Title:  canals and wells, wine-vaults, cellars, and cisterns of all sorts.
Title:  Likewise, by way of preliminary, I desire to remind the reader, that
Title:  while in the earlier geological strata there are found the fossils of
Title:  monsters now almost completely extinct; the subsequent relics
Title:  discovered in what are called the Tertiary formations seem the
Title:  connecting, or at any rate intercepted links, between the
Title:  antichronical creatures, and those whose remote posterity are said to
Title:  have entered the Ark; all the Fossil Whales hitherto discovered
Title:  belong to the Tertiary period, which is the last preceding the
Title:  superficial formations.  And though none of them precisely answer to
Title:  any known species of the present time, they are yet sufficiently akin
Title:  to them in general respects, to justify their taking rank as
Title:  Cetacean fossils.
Title:  
Title:  Detached broken fossils of pre-adamite whales, fragments of their
Title:  bones and skeletons, have within thirty years past, at various
Title:  intervals, been found at the base of the Alps, in Lombardy, in
Title:  France, in England, in Scotland, and in the States of Louisiana,
Title:  Mississippi, and Alabama.  Among the more curious of such remains is
Title:  part of a skull, which in the year 1779 was disinterred in the Rue
Title:  Dauphine in Paris, a short street opening almost directly upon the
Title:  palace of the Tuileries; and bones disinterred in excavating the
Title:  great docks of Antwerp, in Napoleon's time.  Cuvier pronounced these
Title:  fragments to have belonged to some utterly unknown Leviathanic
Title:  species.
Title:  
Title:  But by far the most wonderful of all Cetacean relics was the almost
Title:  complete vast skeleton of an extinct monster, found in the year 1842,
Title:  on the plantation of Judge Creagh, in Alabama.  The awe-stricken
Title:  credulous slaves in the vicinity took it for the bones of one of the
Title:  fallen angels.  The Alabama doctors declared it a huge reptile, and
Title:  bestowed upon it the name of Basilosaurus.  But some specimen bones
Title:  of it being taken across the sea to Owen, the English Anatomist, it
Title:  turned out that this alleged reptile was a whale, though of a
Title:  departed species.  A significant illustration of the fact, again and
Title:  again repeated in this book, that the skeleton of the whale furnishes
Title:  but little clue to the shape of his fully invested body.  So Owen
Title:  rechristened the monster Zeuglodon; and in his paper read before the
Title:  London Geological Society, pronounced it, in substance, one of the
Title:  most extraordinary creatures which the mutations of the globe have
Title:  blotted out of existence.
Title:  
Title:  When I stand among these mighty Leviathan skeletons, skulls, tusks,
Title:  jaws, ribs, and vertebrae, all characterized by partial resemblances
Title:  to the existing breeds of sea-monsters; but at the same time bearing
Title:  on the other hand similar affinities to the annihilated antichronical
Title:  Leviathans, their incalculable seniors; I am, by a flood, borne back
Title:  to that wondrous period, ere time itself can be said to have begun;
Title:  for time began with man.  Here Saturn's grey chaos rolls over me, and
Title:  I obtain dim, shuddering glimpses into those Polar eternities; when
Title:  wedged bastions of ice pressed hard upon what are now the Tropics;
Title:  and in all the 25,000 miles of this world's circumference, not an
Title:  inhabitable hand's breadth of land was visible.  Then the whole world
Title:  was the whale's; and, king of creation, he left his wake along the
Title:  present lines of the Andes and the Himmalehs.  Who can show a
Title:  pedigree like Leviathan?  Ahab's harpoon had shed older blood than
Title:  the Pharaoh's.  Methuselah seems a school-boy.  I look round to shake
Title:  hands with Shem.  I am horror-struck at this antemosaic, unsourced
Title:  existence of the unspeakable terrors of the whale, which, having been
Title:  before all time, must needs exist after all humane ages are over.
Title:  
Title:  But not alone has this Leviathan left his pre-adamite traces in the
Title:  stereotype plates of nature, and in limestone and marl bequeathed his
Title:  ancient bust; but upon Egyptian tablets, whose antiquity seems to
Title:  claim for them an almost fossiliferous character, we find the
Title:  unmistakable print of his fin.  In an apartment of the great temple
Title:  of Denderah, some fifty years ago, there was discovered upon the
Title:  granite ceiling a sculptured and painted planisphere, abounding in
Title:  centaurs, griffins, and dolphins, similar to the grotesque figures
Title:  on the celestial globe of the moderns.  Gliding among them, old
Title:  Leviathan swam as of yore; was there swimming in that planisphere,
Title:  centuries before Solomon was cradled.
Title:  
Title:  Nor must there be omitted another strange attestation of the
Title:  antiquity of the whale, in his own osseous post-diluvian reality, as
Title:  set down by the venerable John Leo, the old Barbary traveller.
Title:  
Title:  "Not far from the Sea-side, they have a Temple, the Rafters and Beams
Title:  of which are made of Whale-Bones; for Whales of a monstrous size are
Title:  oftentimes cast up dead upon that shore.  The Common People imagine,
Title:  that by a secret Power bestowed by God upon the temple, no Whale can
Title:  pass it without immediate death.  But the truth of the Matter is,
Title:  that on either side of the Temple, there are Rocks that shoot two
Title:  Miles into the Sea, and wound the Whales when they light upon 'em.
Title:  They keep a Whale's Rib of an incredible length for a Miracle, which
Title:  lying upon the Ground with its convex part uppermost, makes an Arch,
Title:  the Head of which cannot be reached by a Man upon a Camel's Back.
Title:  This Rib (says John Leo) is said to have layn there a hundred Years
Title:  before I saw it.  Their Historians affirm, that a Prophet who
Title:  prophesy'd of Mahomet, came from this Temple, and some do not stand
Title:  to assert, that the Prophet Jonas was cast forth by the Whale at the
Title:  Base of the Temple."
Title:  
Title:  In this Afric Temple of the Whale I leave you, reader, and if you be
Title:  a Nantucketer, and a whaleman, you will silently worship there.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 105
Title:  
Title:  Does the Whale's Magnitude Diminish?--Will He Perish?
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Inasmuch, then, as this Leviathan comes floundering down upon us from
Title:  the head-waters of the Eternities, it may be fitly inquired, whether,
Title:  in the long course of his generations, he has not degenerated from
Title:  the original bulk of his sires.
Title:  
Title:  But upon investigation we find, that not only are the whales of the
Title:  present day superior in magnitude to those whose fossil remains are
Title:  found in the Tertiary system (embracing a distinct geological period
Title:  prior to man), but of the whales found in that Tertiary system, those
Title:  belonging to its latter formations exceed in size those of its
Title:  earlier ones.
Title:  
Title:  Of all the pre-adamite whales yet exhumed, by far the largest is the
Title:  Alabama one mentioned in the last chapter, and that was less than
Title:  seventy feet in length in the skeleton.  Whereas, we have already
Title:  seen, that the tape-measure gives seventy-two feet for the skeleton
Title:  of a large sized modern whale.  And I have heard, on whalemen's
Title:  authority, that Sperm Whales have been captured near a hundred feet
Title:  long at the time of capture.
Title:  
Title:  But may it not be, that while the whales of the present hour are an
Title:  advance in magnitude upon those of all previous geological periods;
Title:  may it not be, that since Adam's time they have degenerated?
Title:  
Title:  Assuredly, we must conclude so, if we are to credit the accounts of
Title:  such gentlemen as Pliny, and the ancient naturalists generally.  For
Title:  Pliny tells us of Whales that embraced acres of living bulk, and
Title:  Aldrovandus of others which measured eight hundred feet in
Title:  length--Rope Walks and Thames Tunnels of Whales!  And even in the
Title:  days of Banks and Solander, Cooke's naturalists, we find a Danish
Title:  member of the Academy of Sciences setting down certain Iceland Whales
Title:  (reydan-siskur, or Wrinkled Bellies) at one hundred and twenty yards;
Title:  that is, three hundred and sixty feet.  And Lacepede, the French
Title:  naturalist, in his elaborate history of whales, in the very beginning
Title:  of his work (page 3), sets down the Right Whale at one hundred
Title:  metres, three hundred and twenty-eight feet.  And this work was
Title:  published so late as A.D. 1825.
Title:  
Title:  But will any whaleman believe these stories?  No.  The whale of
Title:  to-day is as big as his ancestors in Pliny's time.  And if ever I go
Title:  where Pliny is, I, a whaleman (more than he was), will make bold to
Title:  tell him so.  Because I cannot understand how it is, that while the
Title:  Egyptian mummies that were buried thousands of years before even
Title:  Pliny was born, do not measure so much in their coffins as a modern
Title:  Kentuckian in his socks; and while the cattle and other animals
Title:  sculptured on the oldest Egyptian and Nineveh tablets, by the
Title:  relative proportions in which they are drawn, just as plainly prove
Title:  that the high-bred, stall-fed, prize cattle of Smithfield, not only
Title:  equal, but far exceed in magnitude the fattest of Pharaoh's fat kine;
Title:  in the face of all this, I will not admit that of all animals the
Title:  whale alone should have degenerated.
Title:  
Title:  But still another inquiry remains; one often agitated by the more
Title:  recondite Nantucketers.  Whether owing to the almost omniscient
Title:  look-outs at the mast-heads of the whaleships, now penetrating even
Title:  through Behring's straits, and into the remotest secret drawers and
Title:  lockers of the world; and the thousand harpoons and lances darted
Title:  along all continental coasts; the moot point is, whether Leviathan
Title:  can long endure so wide a chase, and so remorseless a havoc; whether
Title:  he must not at last be exterminated from the waters, and the last
Title:  whale, like the last man, smoke his last pipe, and then himself
Title:  evaporate in the final puff.
Title:  
Title:  Comparing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds of
Title:  buffalo, which, not forty years ago, overspread by tens of thousands
Title:  the prairies of Illinois and Missouri, and shook their iron manes and
Title:  scowled with their thunder-clotted brows upon the sites of populous
Title:  river-capitals, where now the polite broker sells you land at a
Title:  dollar an inch; in such a comparison an irresistible argument would
Title:  seem furnished, to show that the hunted whale cannot now escape
Title:  speedy extinction.
Title:  
Title:  But you must look at this matter in every light.  Though so short a
Title:  period ago--not a good lifetime--the census of the buffalo in
Title:  Illinois exceeded the census of men now in London, and though at the
Title:  present day not one horn or hoof of them remains in all that region;
Title:  and though the cause of this wondrous extermination was the spear of
Title:  man; yet the far different nature of the whale-hunt peremptorily
Title:  forbids so inglorious an end to the Leviathan.  Forty men in one ship
Title:  hunting the Sperm Whales for forty-eight months think they have done
Title:  extremely well, and thank God, if at last they carry home the oil of
Title:  forty fish.  Whereas, in the days of the old Canadian and Indian
Title:  hunters and trappers of the West, when the far west (in whose sunset
Title:  suns still rise) was a wilderness and a virgin, the same number of
Title:  moccasined men, for the same number of months, mounted on horse
Title:  instead of sailing in ships, would have slain not forty, but forty
Title:  thousand and more buffaloes; a fact that, if need were, could be
Title:  statistically stated.
Title:  
Title:  Nor, considered aright, does it seem any argument in favour of the
Title:  gradual extinction of the Sperm Whale, for example, that in former
Title:  years (the latter part of the last century, say) these Leviathans, in
Title:  small pods, were encountered much oftener than at present, and, in
Title:  consequence, the voyages were not so prolonged, and were also much
Title:  more remunerative.  Because, as has been elsewhere noticed, those
Title:  whales, influenced by some views to safety, now swim the seas in
Title:  immense caravans, so that to a large degree the scattered solitaries,
Title:  yokes, and pods, and schools of other days are now aggregated into
Title:  vast but widely separated, unfrequent armies.  That is all.  And
Title:  equally fallacious seems the conceit, that because the so-called
Title:  whale-bone whales no longer haunt many grounds in former years
Title:  abounding with them, hence that species also is declining.  For they
Title:  are only being driven from promontory to cape; and if one coast is no
Title:  longer enlivened with their jets, then, be sure, some other and
Title:  remoter strand has been very recently startled by the unfamiliar
Title:  spectacle.
Title:  
Title:  Furthermore: concerning these last mentioned Leviathans, they have
Title:  two firm fortresses, which, in all human probability, will for ever
Title:  remain impregnable.  And as upon the invasion of their valleys, the
Title:  frosty Swiss have retreated to their mountains; so, hunted from the
Title:  savannas and glades of the middle seas, the whale-bone whales can at
Title:  last resort to their Polar citadels, and diving under the ultimate
Title:  glassy barriers and walls there, come up among icy fields and floes;
Title:  and in a charmed circle of everlasting December, bid defiance to all
Title:  pursuit from man.
Title:  
Title:  But as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned for one
Title:  cachalot, some philosophers of the forecastle have concluded that
Title:  this positive havoc has already very seriously diminished their
Title:  battalions.  But though for some time past a number of these whales,
Title:  not less than 13,000, have been annually slain on the nor'-west
Title:  coast by the Americans alone; yet there are considerations which
Title:  render even this circumstance of little or no account as an opposing
Title:  argument in this matter.
Title:  
Title:  Natural as it is to be somewhat incredulous concerning the
Title:  populousness of the more enormous creatures of the globe, yet what
Title:  shall we say to Harto, the historian of Goa, when he tells us that at
Title:  one hunting the King of Siam took 4,000 elephants; that in those
Title:  regions elephants are numerous as droves of cattle in the temperate
Title:  climes.  And there seems no reason to doubt that if these elephants,
Title:  which have now been hunted for thousands of years, by Semiramis, by
Title:  Porus, by Hannibal, and by all the successive monarchs of the
Title:  East--if they still survive there in great numbers, much more may the
Title:  great whale outlast all hunting, since he has a pasture to expatiate
Title:  in, which is precisely twice as large as all Asia, both Americas,
Title:  Europe and Africa, New Holland, and all the Isles of the sea
Title:  combined.
Title:  
Title:  Moreover: we are to consider, that from the presumed great longevity
Title:  of whales, their probably attaining the age of a century and more,
Title:  therefore at any one period of time, several distinct adult
Title:  generations must be contemporary.  And what that is, we may soon
Title:  gain some idea of, by imagining all the grave-yards, cemeteries, and
Title:  family vaults of creation yielding up the live bodies of all the men,
Title:  women, and children who were alive seventy-five years ago; and adding
Title:  this countless host to the present human population of the globe.
Title:  
Title:  Wherefore, for all these things, we account the whale immortal in his
Title:  species, however perishable in his individuality.  He swam the seas
Title:  before the continents broke water; he once swam over the site of the
Title:  Tuileries, and Windsor Castle, and the Kremlin.  In Noah's flood he
Title:  despised Noah's Ark; and if ever the world is to be again flooded,
Title:  like the Netherlands, to kill off its rats, then the eternal whale
Title:  will still survive, and rearing upon the topmost crest of the
Title:  equatorial flood, spout his frothed defiance to the skies.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 106
Title:  
Title:  Ahab's Leg.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The precipitating manner in which Captain Ahab had quitted the Samuel
Title:  Enderby of London, had not been unattended with some small violence
Title:  to his own person.  He had lighted with such energy upon a thwart of
Title:  his boat that his ivory leg had received a half-splintering shock.
Title:  And when after gaining his own deck, and his own pivot-hole there, he
Title:  so vehemently wheeled round with an urgent command to the steersman
Title:  (it was, as ever, something about his not steering inflexibly
Title:  enough); then, the already shaken ivory received such an additional
Title:  twist and wrench, that though it still remained entire, and to all
Title:  appearances lusty, yet Ahab did not deem it entirely trustworthy.
Title:  
Title:  And, indeed, it seemed small matter for wonder, that for all his
Title:  pervading, mad recklessness, Ahab did at times give careful heed to
Title:  the condition of that dead bone upon which he partly stood.  For it
Title:  had not been very long prior to the Pequod's sailing from Nantucket,
Title:  that he had been found one night lying prone upon the ground, and
Title:  insensible; by some unknown, and seemingly inexplicable, unimaginable
Title:  casualty, his ivory limb having been so violently displaced, that it
Title:  had stake-wise smitten, and all but pierced his groin; nor was it
Title:  without extreme difficulty that the agonizing wound was entirely
Title:  cured.
Title:  
Title:  Nor, at the time, had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind, that
Title:  all the anguish of that then present suffering was but the direct
Title:  issue of a former woe; and he too plainly seemed to see, that as the
Title:  most poisonous reptile of the marsh perpetuates his kind as
Title:  inevitably as the sweetest songster of the grove; so, equally with
Title:  every felicity, all miserable events do naturally beget their like.
Title:  Yea, more than equally, thought Ahab; since both the ancestry and
Title:  posterity of Grief go further than the ancestry and posterity of Joy.
Title:  For, not to hint of this: that it is an inference from certain
Title:  canonic teachings, that while some natural enjoyments here shall have
Title:  no children born to them for the other world, but, on the contrary,
Title:  shall be followed by the joy-childlessness of all hell's despair;
Title:  whereas, some guilty mortal miseries shall still fertilely beget to
Title:  themselves an eternally progressive progeny of griefs beyond the
Title:  grave; not at all to hint of this, there still seems an inequality in
Title:  the deeper analysis of the thing.  For, thought Ahab, while even the
Title:  highest earthly felicities ever have a certain unsignifying pettiness
Title:  lurking in them, but, at bottom, all heartwoes, a mystic
Title:  significance, and, in some men, an archangelic grandeur; so do their
Title:  diligent tracings-out not belie the obvious deduction.  To trail the
Title:  genealogies of these high mortal miseries, carries us at last among
Title:  the sourceless primogenitures of the gods; so that, in the face of
Title:  all the glad, hay-making suns, and soft cymballing, round
Title:  harvest-moons, we must needs give in to this: that the gods
Title:  themselves are not for ever glad.  The ineffaceable, sad birth-mark
Title:  in the brow of man, is but the stamp of sorrow in the signers.
Title:  
Title:  Unwittingly here a secret has been divulged, which perhaps might more
Title:  properly, in set way, have been disclosed before.  With many other
Title:  particulars concerning Ahab, always had it remained a mystery to
Title:  some, why it was, that for a certain period, both before and after
Title:  the sailing of the Pequod, he had hidden himself away with such
Title:  Grand-Lama-like exclusiveness; and, for that one interval, sought
Title:  speechless refuge, as it were, among the marble senate of the dead.
Title:  Captain Peleg's bruited reason for this thing appeared by no means
Title:  adequate; though, indeed, as touching all Ahab's deeper part, every
Title:  revelation partook more of significant darkness than of explanatory
Title:  light.  But, in the end, it all came out; this one matter did, at
Title:  least.  That direful mishap was at the bottom of his temporary
Title:  recluseness.  And not only this, but to that ever-contracting,
Title:  dropping circle ashore, who, for any reason, possessed the privilege
Title:  of a less banned approach to him; to that timid circle the above
Title:  hinted casualty--remaining, as it did, moodily unaccounted for by
Title:  Ahab--invested itself with terrors, not entirely underived from the
Title:  land of spirits and of wails.  So that, through their zeal for him,
Title:  they had all conspired, so far as in them lay, to muffle up the
Title:  knowledge of this thing from others; and hence it was, that not till
Title:  a considerable interval had elapsed, did it transpire upon the
Title:  Pequod's decks.
Title:  
Title:  But be all this as it may; let the unseen, ambiguous synod in the
Title:  air, or the vindictive princes and potentates of fire, have to do or
Title:  not with earthly Ahab, yet, in this present matter of his leg, he
Title:  took plain practical procedures;--he called the carpenter.
Title:  
Title:  And when that functionary appeared before him, he bade him without
Title:  delay set about making a new leg, and directed the mates to see him
Title:  supplied with all the studs and joists of jaw-ivory (Sperm Whale)
Title:  which had thus far been accumulated on the voyage, in order that a
Title:  careful selection of the stoutest, clearest-grained stuff might be
Title:  secured.  This done, the carpenter received orders to have the leg
Title:  completed that night; and to provide all the fittings for it,
Title:  independent of those pertaining to the distrusted one in use.
Title:  Moreover, the ship's forge was ordered to be hoisted out of its
Title:  temporary idleness in the hold; and, to accelerate the affair, the
Title:  blacksmith was commanded to proceed at once to the forging of
Title:  whatever iron contrivances might be needed.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 107
Title:  
Title:  The Carpenter.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Seat thyself sultanically among the moons of Saturn, and take high
Title:  abstracted man alone; and he seems a wonder, a grandeur, and a woe.
Title:  But from the same point, take mankind in mass, and for the most part,
Title:  they seem a mob of unnecessary duplicates, both contemporary and
Title:  hereditary.  But most humble though he was, and far from furnishing
Title:  an example of the high, humane abstraction; the Pequod's carpenter
Title:  was no duplicate; hence, he now comes in person on this stage.
Title:  
Title:  Like all sea-going ship carpenters, and more especially those
Title:  belonging to whaling vessels, he was, to a certain off-handed,
Title:  practical extent, alike experienced in numerous trades and callings
Title:  collateral to his own; the carpenter's pursuit being the ancient and
Title:  outbranching trunk of all those numerous handicrafts which more or
Title:  less have to do with wood as an auxiliary material.  But, besides the
Title:  application to him of the generic remark above, this carpenter of the
Title:  Pequod was singularly efficient in those thousand nameless mechanical
Title:  emergencies continually recurring in a large ship, upon a three or
Title:  four years' voyage, in uncivilized and far-distant seas.  For not to
Title:  speak of his readiness in ordinary duties:--repairing stove boats,
Title:  sprung spars, reforming the shape of clumsy-bladed oars, inserting
Title:  bull's eyes in the deck, or new tree-nails in the side planks, and
Title:  other miscellaneous matters more directly pertaining to his special
Title:  business; he was moreover unhesitatingly expert in all manner of
Title:  conflicting aptitudes, both useful and capricious.
Title:  
Title:  The one grand stage where he enacted all his various parts so
Title:  manifold, was his vice-bench; a long rude ponderous table furnished
Title:  with several vices, of different sizes, and both of iron and of wood.
Title:  At all times except when whales were alongside, this bench was
Title:  securely lashed athwartships against the rear of the Try-works.
Title:  
Title:  A belaying pin is found too large to be easily inserted into its
Title:  hole: the carpenter claps it into one of his ever-ready vices, and
Title:  straightway files it smaller.  A lost land-bird of strange plumage
Title:  strays on board, and is made a captive: out of clean shaved rods of
Title:  right-whale bone, and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory, the carpenter
Title:  makes a pagoda-looking cage for it.  An oarsman sprains his wrist:
Title:  the carpenter concocts a soothing lotion.  Stubb longed for
Title:  vermillion stars to be painted upon the blade of his every oar;
Title:  screwing each oar in his big vice of wood, the carpenter
Title:  symmetrically supplies the constellation.  A sailor takes a fancy to
Title:  wear shark-bone ear-rings: the carpenter drills his ears.  Another
Title:  has the toothache: the carpenter out pincers, and clapping one hand
Title:  upon his bench bids him be seated there; but the poor fellow
Title:  unmanageably winces under the unconcluded operation; whirling round
Title:  the handle of his wooden vice, the carpenter signs him to clap his
Title:  jaw in that, if he would have him draw the tooth.
Title:  
Title:  Thus, this carpenter was prepared at all points, and alike
Title:  indifferent and without respect in all.  Teeth he accounted bits of
Title:  ivory; heads he deemed but top-blocks; men themselves he lightly held
Title:  for capstans.  But while now upon so wide a field thus variously
Title:  accomplished and with such liveliness of expertness in him, too; all
Title:  this would seem to argue some uncommon vivacity of intelligence.  But
Title:  not precisely so.  For nothing was this man more remarkable, than for
Title:  a certain impersonal stolidity as it were; impersonal, I say; for it
Title:  so shaded off into the surrounding infinite of things, that it seemed
Title:  one with the general stolidity discernible in the whole visible
Title:  world; which while pauselessly active in uncounted modes, still
Title:  eternally holds its peace, and ignores you, though you dig
Title:  foundations for cathedrals.  Yet was this half-horrible stolidity in
Title:  him, involving, too, as it appeared, an all-ramifying
Title:  heartlessness;--yet was it oddly dashed at times, with an old,
Title:  crutch-like, antediluvian, wheezing humorousness, not unstreaked now
Title:  and then with a certain grizzled wittiness; such as might have served
Title:  to pass the time during the midnight watch on the bearded forecastle
Title:  of Noah's ark.  Was it that this old carpenter had been a life-long
Title:  wanderer, whose much rolling, to and fro, not only had gathered no
Title:  moss; but what is more, had rubbed off whatever small outward
Title:  clingings might have originally pertained to him?  He was a stript
Title:  abstract; an unfractioned integral; uncompromised as a new-born babe;
Title:  living without premeditated reference to this world or the next.  You
Title:  might almost say, that this strange uncompromisedness in him involved
Title:  a sort of unintelligence; for in his numerous trades, he did not seem
Title:  to work so much by reason or by instinct, or simply because he had
Title:  been tutored to it, or by any intermixture of all these, even or
Title:  uneven; but merely by a kind of deaf and dumb, spontaneous literal
Title:  process.  He was a pure manipulator; his brain, if he had ever had
Title:  one, must have early oozed along into the muscles of his fingers.  He
Title:  was like one of those unreasoning but still highly useful, MULTUM IN
Title:  PARVO, Sheffield contrivances, assuming the exterior--though a little
Title:  swelled--of a common pocket knife; but containing, not only blades of
Title:  various sizes, but also screw-drivers, cork-screws, tweezers, awls,
Title:  pens, rulers, nail-filers, countersinkers.  So, if his superiors
Title:  wanted to use the carpenter for a screw-driver, all they had to do
Title:  was to open that part of him, and the screw was fast: or if for
Title:  tweezers, take him up by the legs, and there they were.
Title:  
Title:  Yet, as previously hinted, this omnitooled, open-and-shut carpenter,
Title:  was, after all, no mere machine of an automaton.  If he did not have
Title:  a common soul in him, he had a subtle something that somehow
Title:  anomalously did its duty.  What that was, whether essence of
Title:  quicksilver, or a few drops of hartshorn, there is no telling.  But
Title:  there it was; and there it had abided for now some sixty years or
Title:  more.  And this it was, this same unaccountable, cunning
Title:  life-principle in him; this it was, that kept him a great part of the
Title:  time soliloquizing; but only like an unreasoning wheel, which also
Title:  hummingly soliloquizes; or rather, his body was a sentry-box and this
Title:  soliloquizer on guard there, and talking all the time to keep himself
Title:  awake.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 108
Title:  
Title:  Ahab and the Carpenter.
Title:  
Title:  The Deck--First Night Watch.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  (CARPENTER STANDING BEFORE HIS VICE-BENCH, AND BY THE LIGHT OF TWO
Title:  LANTERNS BUSILY FILING THE IVORY JOIST FOR THE LEG, WHICH JOIST IS
Title:  FIRMLY FIXED IN THE VICE.  SLABS OF IVORY, LEATHER STRAPS, PADS,
Title:  SCREWS, AND VARIOUS TOOLS OF ALL SORTS LYING ABOUT THE BENCH.
Title:  FORWARD, THE RED FLAME OF THE FORGE IS SEEN, WHERE THE BLACKSMITH IS
Title:  AT WORK.)
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Drat the file, and drat the bone!  That is hard which should be soft,
Title:  and that is soft which should be hard.  So we go, who file old jaws
Title:  and shinbones.  Let's try another.  Aye, now, this works better
Title:  (SNEEZES).  Halloa, this bone dust is (SNEEZES)--why it's
Title:  (SNEEZES)--yes it's (SNEEZES)--bless my soul, it won't let me speak!
Title:  This is what an old fellow gets now for working in dead lumber.  Saw
Title:  a live tree, and you don't get this dust; amputate a live bone, and
Title:  you don't get it (SNEEZES).  Come, come, you old Smut, there, bear a
Title:  hand, and let's have that ferule and buckle-screw; I'll be ready
Title:  for them presently.  Lucky now (SNEEZES) there's no knee-joint to
Title:  make; that might puzzle a little; but a mere shinbone--why it's
Title:  easy as making hop-poles; only I should like to put a good finish on.
Title:  Time, time; if I but only had the time, I could turn him out as neat
Title:  a leg now as ever (SNEEZES) scraped to a lady in a parlor.  Those
Title:  buckskin legs and calves of legs I've seen in shop windows wouldn't
Title:  compare at all.  They soak water, they do; and of course get
Title:  rheumatic, and have to be doctored (SNEEZES) with washes and lotions,
Title:  just like live legs.  There; before I saw it off, now, I must call his
Title:  old Mogulship, and see whether the length will be all right; too
Title:  short, if anything, I guess.  Ha! that's the heel; we are in luck;
Title:  here he comes, or it's somebody else, that's certain.
Title:  
Title:  AHAB (ADVANCING)
Title:  
Title:  (DURING THE ENSUING SCENE, THE CARPENTER CONTINUES SNEEZING AT TIMES)
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Well, manmaker!
Title:  
Title:  Just in time, sir.  If the captain pleases, I will now mark the
Title:  length.  Let me measure, sir.
Title:  
Title:  Measured for a leg! good.  Well, it's not the first time.  About it!
Title:  There; keep thy finger on it.  This is a cogent vice thou hast here,
Title:  carpenter; let me feel its grip once.  So, so; it does pinch some.
Title:  
Title:  Oh, sir, it will break bones--beware, beware!
Title:  
Title:  No fear; I like a good grip; I like to feel something in this
Title:  slippery world that can hold, man.  What's Prometheus about
Title:  there?--the blacksmith, I mean--what's he about?
Title:  
Title:  He must be forging the buckle-screw, sir, now.
Title:  
Title:  Right.  It's a partnership; he supplies the muscle part.  He makes a
Title:  fierce red flame there!
Title:  
Title:  Aye, sir; he must have the white heat for this kind of fine work.
Title:  
Title:  Um-m.  So he must.  I do deem it now a most meaning thing, that that
Title:  old Greek, Prometheus, who made men, they say, should have been a
Title:  blacksmith, and animated them with fire; for what's made in fire must
Title:  properly belong to fire; and so hell's probable.  How the soot flies!
Title:  This must be the remainder the Greek made the Africans of.
Title:  Carpenter, when he's through with that buckle, tell him to forge a
Title:  pair of steel shoulder-blades; there's a pedlar aboard with a
Title:  crushing pack.
Title:  
Title:  Sir?
Title:  
Title:  Hold; while Prometheus is about it, I'll order a complete man after a
Title:  desirable pattern.  Imprimis, fifty feet high in his socks; then,
Title:  chest modelled after the Thames Tunnel; then, legs with roots to 'em,
Title:  to stay in one place; then, arms three feet through the wrist; no
Title:  heart at all, brass forehead, and about a quarter of an acre of fine
Title:  brains; and let me see--shall I order eyes to see outwards?  No, but
Title:  put a sky-light on top of his head to illuminate inwards.  There,
Title:  take the order, and away.
Title:  
Title:  Now, what's he speaking about, and who's he speaking to, I should
Title:  like to know?  Shall I keep standing here? (ASIDE).
Title:  
Title:  'Tis but indifferent architecture to make a blind dome; here's one.
Title:  No, no, no; I must have a lantern.
Title:  
Title:  Ho, ho!  That's it, hey?  Here are two, sir; one will serve my turn.
Title:  
Title:  What art thou thrusting that thief-catcher into my face for, man?
Title:  Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols.
Title:  
Title:  I thought, sir, that you spoke to carpenter.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Carpenter? why that's--but no;--a very tidy, and, I may say, an
Title:  extremely gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here,
Title:  carpenter;--or would'st thou rather work in clay?
Title:  
Title:  Sir?--Clay? clay, sir?  That's mud; we leave clay to ditchers, sir.
Title:  
Title:  The fellow's impious!  What art thou sneezing about?
Title:  
Title:  Bone is rather dusty, sir.
Title:  
Title:  Take the hint, then; and when thou art dead, never bury thyself under
Title:  living people's noses.
Title:  
Title:  Sir?--oh! ah!--I guess so;--yes--dear!
Title:  
Title:  Look ye, carpenter, I dare say thou callest thyself a right good
Title:  workmanlike workman, eh?  Well, then, will it speak thoroughly well
Title:  for thy work, if, when I come to mount this leg thou makest, I shall
Title:  nevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it;
Title:  that is, carpenter, my old lost leg; the flesh and blood one, I mean.
Title:  Canst thou not drive that old Adam away?
Title:  
Title:  Truly, sir, I begin to understand somewhat now.  Yes, I have heard
Title:  something curious on that score, sir; how that a dismasted man never
Title:  entirely loses the feeling of his old spar, but it will be still
Title:  pricking him at times.  May I humbly ask if it be really so, sir?
Title:  
Title:  It is, man.  Look, put thy live leg here in the place where mine once
Title:  was; so, now, here is only one distinct leg to the eye, yet two to
Title:  the soul.  Where thou feelest tingling life; there, exactly there,
Title:  there to a hair, do I.  Is't a riddle?
Title:  
Title:  I should humbly call it a poser, sir.
Title:  
Title:  Hist, then.  How dost thou know that some entire, living, thinking
Title:  thing may not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing
Title:  precisely where thou now standest; aye, and standing there in thy
Title:  spite?  In thy most solitary hours, then, dost thou not fear
Title:  eavesdroppers?  Hold, don't speak!  And if I still feel the smart of
Title:  my crushed leg, though it be now so long dissolved; then, why mayst
Title:  not thou, carpenter, feel the fiery pains of hell for ever, and
Title:  without a body?  Hah!
Title:  
Title:  Good Lord!  Truly, sir, if it comes to that, I must calculate over
Title:  again; I think I didn't carry a small figure, sir.
Title:  
Title:  Look ye, pudding-heads should never grant premises.--How long before
Title:  the leg is done?
Title:  
Title:  Perhaps an hour, sir.
Title:  
Title:  Bungle away at it then, and bring it to me (TURNS TO GO).  Oh, Life!
Title:  Here I am, proud as Greek god, and yet standing debtor to this
Title:  blockhead for a bone to stand on!  Cursed be that mortal
Title:  inter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers.  I would be
Title:  free as air; and I'm down in the whole world's books.  I am so rich,
Title:  I could have given bid for bid with the wealthiest Praetorians at the
Title:  auction of the Roman empire (which was the world's); and yet I owe
Title:  for the flesh in the tongue I brag with.  By heavens!  I'll get a
Title:  crucible, and into it, and dissolve myself down to one small,
Title:  compendious vertebra.  So.
Title:  
Title:  CARPENTER (RESUMING HIS WORK).
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Well, well, well!  Stubb knows him best of all, and Stubb always says
Title:  he's queer; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer;
Title:  he's queer, says Stubb; he's queer--queer, queer; and keeps dinning
Title:  it into Mr. Starbuck all the time--queer--sir--queer, queer, very
Title:  queer.  And here's his leg!  Yes, now that I think of it, here's his
Title:  bedfellow! has a stick of whale's jaw-bone for a wife!  And this is
Title:  his leg; he'll stand on this.  What was that now about one leg
Title:  standing in three places, and all three places standing in one
Title:  hell--how was that?  Oh!  I don't wonder he looked so scornful at me!
Title:  I'm a sort of strange-thoughted sometimes, they say; but that's only
Title:  haphazard-like.  Then, a short, little old body like me, should never
Title:  undertake to wade out into deep waters with tall, heron-built
Title:  captains; the water chucks you under the chin pretty quick, and
Title:  there's a great cry for life-boats.  And here's the heron's leg! long
Title:  and slim, sure enough!  Now, for most folks one pair of legs lasts a
Title:  lifetime, and that must be because they use them mercifully, as a
Title:  tender-hearted old lady uses her roly-poly old coach-horses.  But
Title:  Ahab; oh he's a hard driver.  Look, driven one leg to death, and
Title:  spavined the other for life, and now wears out bone legs by the cord.
Title:  Halloa, there, you Smut! bear a hand there with those screws, and
Title:  let's finish it before the resurrection fellow comes a-calling with
Title:  his horn for all legs, true or false, as brewery-men go round
Title:  collecting old beer barrels, to fill 'em up again.  What a leg this
Title:  is!  It looks like a real live leg, filed down to nothing but the
Title:  core; he'll be standing on this to-morrow; he'll be taking altitudes
Title:  on it.  Halloa!  I almost forgot the little oval slate, smoothed
Title:  ivory, where he figures up the latitude.  So, so; chisel, file, and
Title:  sand-paper, now!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 109
Title:  
Title:  Ahab and Starbuck in the Cabin.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  According to usage they were pumping the ship next morning; and lo!
Title:  no inconsiderable oil came up with the water; the casks below must
Title:  have sprung a bad leak.  Much concern was shown; and Starbuck went
Title:  down into the cabin to report this unfavourable affair.*
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *In Sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board, it
Title:  is a regular semiweekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold, and
Title:  drench the casks with sea-water; which afterwards, at varying
Title:  intervals, is removed by the ship's pumps.  Hereby the casks are
Title:  sought to be kept damply tight; while by the changed character of the
Title:  withdrawn water, the mariners readily detect any serious leakage in
Title:  the precious cargo.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Now, from the South and West the Pequod was drawing nigh to Formosa
Title:  and the Bashee Isles, between which lies one of the tropical outlets
Title:  from the China waters into the Pacific.  And so Starbuck found Ahab
Title:  with a general chart of the oriental archipelagoes spread before him;
Title:  and another separate one representing the long eastern coasts of the
Title:  Japanese islands--Niphon, Matsmai, and Sikoke.  With his snow-white
Title:  new ivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table, and with a
Title:  long pruning-hook of a jack-knife in his hand, the wondrous old man,
Title:  with his back to the gangway door, was wrinkling his brow, and
Title:  tracing his old courses again.
Title:  
Title:  "Who's there?" hearing the footstep at the door, but not turning
Title:  round to it.  "On deck!  Begone!"
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Ahab mistakes; it is I.  The oil in the hold is leaking,
Title:  sir.  We must up Burtons and break out."
Title:  
Title:  "Up Burtons and break out?  Now that we are nearing Japan; heave-to
Title:  here for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops?"
Title:  
Title:  "Either do that, sir, or waste in one day more oil than we may make
Title:  good in a year.  What we come twenty thousand miles to get is worth
Title:  saving, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "So it is, so it is; if we get it."
Title:  
Title:  "I was speaking of the oil in the hold, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "And I was not speaking or thinking of that at all.  Begone!  Let it
Title:  leak!  I'm all aleak myself.  Aye! leaks in leaks! not only full of
Title:  leaky casks, but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship; and that's a
Title:  far worse plight than the Pequod's, man.  Yet I don't stop to plug my
Title:  leak; for who can find it in the deep-loaded hull; or how hope to
Title:  plug it, even if found, in this life's howling gale?  Starbuck!
Title:  I'll not have the Burtons hoisted."
Title:  
Title:  "What will the owners say, sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "Let the owners stand on Nantucket beach and outyell the Typhoons.
Title:  What cares Ahab?  Owners, owners?  Thou art always prating to me,
Title:  Starbuck, about those miserly owners, as if the owners were my
Title:  conscience.  But look ye, the only real owner of anything is its
Title:  commander; and hark ye, my conscience is in this ship's keel.--On
Title:  deck!"
Title:  
Title:  "Captain Ahab," said the reddening mate, moving further into the
Title:  cabin, with a daring so strangely respectful and cautious that it
Title:  almost seemed not only every way seeking to avoid the slightest
Title:  outward manifestation of itself, but within also seemed more than
Title:  half distrustful of itself; "A better man than I might well pass over
Title:  in thee what he would quickly enough resent in a younger man; aye,
Title:  and in a happier, Captain Ahab."
Title:  
Title:  "Devils!  Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think of
Title:  me?--On deck!"
Title:  
Title:  "Nay, sir, not yet; I do entreat.  And I do dare, sir--to be
Title:  forbearing!  Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto,
Title:  Captain Ahab?"
Title:  
Title:  Ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack (forming part of most
Title:  South-Sea-men's cabin furniture), and pointing it towards Starbuck,
Title:  exclaimed: "There is one God that is Lord over the earth, and one
Title:  Captain that is lord over the Pequod.--On deck!"
Title:  
Title:  For an instant in the flashing eyes of the mate, and his fiery
Title:  cheeks, you would have almost thought that he had really received the
Title:  blaze of the levelled tube.  But, mastering his emotion, he half
Title:  calmly rose, and as he quitted the cabin, paused for an instant and
Title:  said: "Thou hast outraged, not insulted me, sir; but for that I ask
Title:  thee not to beware of Starbuck; thou wouldst but laugh; but let Ahab
Title:  beware of Ahab; beware of thyself, old man."
Title:  
Title:  "He waxes brave, but nevertheless obeys; most careful bravery that!"
Title:  murmured Ahab, as Starbuck disappeared.  "What's that he said--Ahab
Title:  beware of Ahab--there's something there!"  Then unconsciously using
Title:  the musket for a staff, with an iron brow he paced to and fro in the
Title:  little cabin; but presently the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed,
Title:  and returning the gun to the rack, he went to the deck.
Title:  
Title:  "Thou art but too good a fellow, Starbuck," he said lowly to the
Title:  mate; then raising his voice to the crew: "Furl the t'gallant-sails,
Title:  and close-reef the top-sails, fore and aft; back the main-yard; up
Title:  Burton, and break out in the main-hold."
Title:  
Title:  It were perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was, that as
Title:  respecting Starbuck, Ahab thus acted.  It may have been a flash of
Title:  honesty in him; or mere prudential policy which, under the
Title:  circumstance, imperiously forbade the slightest symptom of open
Title:  disaffection, however transient, in the important chief officer of
Title:  his ship.  However it was, his orders were executed; and the Burtons
Title:  were hoisted.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 110
Title:  
Title:  Queequeg in His Coffin.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Upon searching, it was found that the casks last struck into the hold
Title:  were perfectly sound, and that the leak must be further off.  So, it
Title:  being calm weather, they broke out deeper and deeper, disturbing the
Title:  slumbers of the huge ground-tier butts; and from that black midnight
Title:  sending those gigantic moles into the daylight above.  So deep did
Title:  they go; and so ancient, and corroded, and weedy the aspect of the
Title:  lowermost puncheons, that you almost looked next for some mouldy
Title:  corner-stone cask containing coins of Captain Noah, with copies of
Title:  the posted placards, vainly warning the infatuated old world from the
Title:  flood.  Tierce after tierce, too, of water, and bread, and beef, and
Title:  shooks of staves, and iron bundles of hoops, were hoisted out, till
Title:  at last the piled decks were hard to get about; and the hollow hull
Title:  echoed under foot, as if you were treading over empty catacombs, and
Title:  reeled and rolled in the sea like an air-freighted demijohn.
Title:  Top-heavy was the ship as a dinnerless student with all Aristotle in
Title:  his head.  Well was it that the Typhoons did not visit them then.
Title:  
Title:  Now, at this time it was that my poor pagan companion, and fast
Title:  bosom-friend, Queequeg, was seized with a fever, which brought him
Title:  nigh to his endless end.
Title:  
Title:  Be it said, that in this vocation of whaling, sinecures are unknown;
Title:  dignity and danger go hand in hand; till you get to be Captain, the
Title:  higher you rise the harder you toil.  So with poor Queequeg, who, as
Title:  harpooneer, must not only face all the rage of the living whale,
Title:  but--as we have elsewhere seen--mount his dead back in a rolling sea;
Title:  and finally descend into the gloom of the hold, and bitterly sweating
Title:  all day in that subterraneous confinement, resolutely manhandle the
Title:  clumsiest casks and see to their stowage.  To be short, among
Title:  whalemen, the harpooneers are the holders, so called.
Title:  
Title:  Poor Queequeg! when the ship was about half disembowelled, you should
Title:  have stooped over the hatchway, and peered down upon him there;
Title:  where, stripped to his woollen drawers, the tattooed savage was
Title:  crawling about amid that dampness and slime, like a green spotted
Title:  lizard at the bottom of a well.  And a well, or an ice-house, it
Title:  somehow proved to him, poor pagan; where, strange to say, for all the
Title:  heat of his sweatings, he caught a terrible chill which lapsed into a
Title:  fever; and at last, after some days' suffering, laid him in his
Title:  hammock, close to the very sill of the door of death.  How he wasted
Title:  and wasted away in those few long-lingering days, till there seemed
Title:  but little left of him but his frame and tattooing.  But as all else
Title:  in him thinned, and his cheek-bones grew sharper, his eyes,
Title:  nevertheless, seemed growing fuller and fuller; they became of a
Title:  strange softness of lustre; and mildly but deeply looked out at you
Title:  there from his sickness, a wondrous testimony to that immortal health
Title:  in him which could not die, or be weakened.  And like circles on the
Title:  water, which, as they grow fainter, expand; so his eyes seemed
Title:  rounding and rounding, like the rings of Eternity.  An awe that
Title:  cannot be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of this
Title:  waning savage, and saw as strange things in his face, as any beheld
Title:  who were bystanders when Zoroaster died.  For whatever is truly
Title:  wondrous and fearful in man, never yet was put into words or books.
Title:  And the drawing near of Death, which alike levels all, alike
Title:  impresses all with a last revelation, which only an author from the
Title:  dead could adequately tell.  So that--let us say it again--no dying
Title:  Chaldee or Greek had higher and holier thoughts than those, whose
Title:  mysterious shades you saw creeping over the face of poor Queequeg, as
Title:  he quietly lay in his swaying hammock, and the rolling sea seemed
Title:  gently rocking him to his final rest, and the ocean's invisible
Title:  flood-tide lifted him higher and higher towards his destined heaven.
Title:  
Title:  Not a man of the crew but gave him up; and, as for Queequeg himself,
Title:  what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favour he
Title:  asked.  He called one to him in the grey morning watch, when the day
Title:  was just breaking, and taking his hand, said that while in Nantucket
Title:  he had chanced to see certain little canoes of dark wood, like the
Title:  rich war-wood of his native isle; and upon inquiry, he had learned
Title:  that all whalemen who died in Nantucket, were laid in those same dark
Title:  canoes, and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him; for
Title:  it was not unlike the custom of his own race, who, after embalming a
Title:  dead warrior, stretched him out in his canoe, and so left him to be
Title:  floated away to the starry archipelagoes; for not only do they
Title:  believe that the stars are isles, but that far beyond all visible
Title:  horizons, their own mild, uncontinented seas, interflow with the blue
Title:  heavens; and so form the white breakers of the milky way.  He added,
Title:  that he shuddered at the thought of being buried in his hammock,
Title:  according to the usual sea-custom, tossed like something vile to the
Title:  death-devouring sharks.  No: he desired a canoe like those of
Title:  Nantucket, all the more congenial to him, being a whaleman, that like
Title:  a whale-boat these coffin-canoes were without a keel; though that
Title:  involved but uncertain steering, and much lee-way adown the dim ages.
Title:  
Title:  Now, when this strange circumstance was made known aft, the carpenter
Title:  was at once commanded to do Queequeg's bidding, whatever it might
Title:  include.  There was some heathenish, coffin-coloured old lumber
Title:  aboard, which, upon a long previous voyage, had been cut from the
Title:  aboriginal groves of the Lackaday islands, and from these dark planks
Title:  the coffin was recommended to be made.  No sooner was the carpenter
Title:  apprised of the order, than taking his rule, he forthwith with all
Title:  the indifferent promptitude of his character, proceeded into the
Title:  forecastle and took Queequeg's measure with great accuracy, regularly
Title:  chalking Queequeg's person as he shifted the rule.
Title:  
Title:  "Ah! poor fellow! he'll have to die now," ejaculated the Long Island
Title:  sailor.
Title:  
Title:  Going to his vice-bench, the carpenter for convenience sake and
Title:  general reference, now transferringly measured on it the exact length
Title:  the coffin was to be, and then made the transfer permanent by cutting
Title:  two notches at its extremities.  This done, he marshalled the planks
Title:  and his tools, and to work.
Title:  
Title:  When the last nail was driven, and the lid duly planed and fitted, he
Title:  lightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it, inquiring
Title:  whether they were ready for it yet in that direction.
Title:  
Title:  Overhearing the indignant but half-humorous cries with which the
Title:  people on deck began to drive the coffin away, Queequeg, to every
Title:  one's consternation, commanded that the thing should be instantly
Title:  brought to him, nor was there any denying him; seeing that, of all
Title:  mortals, some dying men are the most tyrannical; and certainly, since
Title:  they will shortly trouble us so little for evermore, the poor fellows
Title:  ought to be indulged.
Title:  
Title:  Leaning over in his hammock, Queequeg long regarded the coffin with
Title:  an attentive eye.  He then called for his harpoon, had the wooden
Title:  stock drawn from it, and then had the iron part placed in the coffin
Title:  along with one of the paddles of his boat.  All by his own request,
Title:  also, biscuits were then ranged round the sides within: a flask of
Title:  fresh water was placed at the head, and a small bag of woody earth
Title:  scraped up in the hold at the foot; and a piece of sail-cloth being
Title:  rolled up for a pillow, Queequeg now entreated to be lifted into his
Title:  final bed, that he might make trial of its comforts, if any it had.
Title:  He lay without moving a few minutes, then told one to go to his bag
Title:  and bring out his little god, Yojo.  Then crossing his arms on his
Title:  breast with Yojo between, he called for the coffin lid (hatch he
Title:  called it) to be placed over him.  The head part turned over with a
Title:  leather hinge, and there lay Queequeg in his coffin with little but
Title:  his composed countenance in view.  "Rarmai" (it will do; it is easy),
Title:  he murmured at last, and signed to be replaced in his hammock.
Title:  
Title:  But ere this was done, Pip, who had been slily hovering near by all
Title:  this while, drew nigh to him where he lay, and with soft sobbings,
Title:  took him by the hand; in the other, holding his tambourine.
Title:  
Title:  "Poor rover! will ye never have done with all this weary roving?
Title:  where go ye now?  But if the currents carry ye to those sweet
Title:  Antilles where the beaches are only beat with water-lilies, will ye
Title:  do one little errand for me?  Seek out one Pip, who's now been
Title:  missing long: I think he's in those far Antilles.  If ye find him,
Title:  then comfort him; for he must be very sad; for look! he's left his
Title:  tambourine behind;--I found it.  Rig-a-dig, dig, dig!  Now, Queequeg,
Title:  die; and I'll beat ye your dying march."
Title:  
Title:  "I have heard," murmured Starbuck, gazing down the scuttle, "that in
Title:  violent fevers, men, all ignorance, have talked in ancient tongues;
Title:  and that when the mystery is probed, it turns out always that in
Title:  their wholly forgotten childhood those ancient tongues had been
Title:  really spoken in their hearing by some lofty scholars.  So, to my
Title:  fond faith, poor Pip, in this strange sweetness of his lunacy, brings
Title:  heavenly vouchers of all our heavenly homes.  Where learned he that,
Title:  but there?--Hark! he speaks again: but more wildly now."
Title:  
Title:  "Form two and two!  Let's make a General of him!  Ho, where's his
Title:  harpoon?  Lay it across here.--Rig-a-dig, dig, dig! huzza!  Oh for a
Title:  game cock now to sit upon his head and crow!  Queequeg dies
Title:  game!--mind ye that; Queequeg dies game!--take ye good heed of that;
Title:  Queequeg dies game!  I say; game, game, game! but base little Pip, he
Title:  died a coward; died all a'shiver;--out upon Pip!  Hark ye; if ye find
Title:  Pip, tell all the Antilles he's a runaway; a coward, a coward, a
Title:  coward!  Tell them he jumped from a whale-boat!  I'd never beat my
Title:  tambourine over base Pip, and hail him General, if he were once more
Title:  dying here.  No, no! shame upon all cowards--shame upon them!  Let 'em
Title:  go drown like Pip, that jumped from a whale-boat.  Shame! shame!"
Title:  
Title:  During all this, Queequeg lay with closed eyes, as if in a dream.
Title:  Pip was led away, and the sick man was replaced in his hammock.
Title:  
Title:  But now that he had apparently made every preparation for death; now
Title:  that his coffin was proved a good fit, Queequeg suddenly rallied;
Title:  soon there seemed no need of the carpenter's box: and thereupon,
Title:  when some expressed their delighted surprise, he, in substance, said,
Title:  that the cause of his sudden convalescence was this;--at a critical
Title:  moment, he had just recalled a little duty ashore, which he was
Title:  leaving undone; and therefore had changed his mind about dying: he
Title:  could not die yet, he averred.  They asked him, then, whether to live
Title:  or die was a matter of his own sovereign will and pleasure.  He
Title:  answered, certainly.  In a word, it was Queequeg's conceit, that if a
Title:  man made up his mind to live, mere sickness could not kill him:
Title:  nothing but a whale, or a gale, or some violent, ungovernable,
Title:  unintelligent destroyer of that sort.
Title:  
Title:  Now, there is this noteworthy difference between savage and
Title:  civilized; that while a sick, civilized man may be six months
Title:  convalescing, generally speaking, a sick savage is almost half-well
Title:  again in a day.  So, in good time my Queequeg gained strength; and at
Title:  length after sitting on the windlass for a few indolent days (but
Title:  eating with a vigorous appetite) he suddenly leaped to his feet,
Title:  threw out his arms and legs, gave himself a good stretching, yawned
Title:  a little bit, and then springing into the head of his hoisted boat,
Title:  and poising a harpoon, pronounced himself fit for a fight.
Title:  
Title:  With a wild whimsiness, he now used his coffin for a sea-chest; and
Title:  emptying into it his canvas bag of clothes, set them in order there.
Title:  Many spare hours he spent, in carving the lid with all manner of
Title:  grotesque figures and drawings; and it seemed that hereby he was
Title:  striving, in his rude way, to copy parts of the twisted tattooing on
Title:  his body.  And this tattooing had been the work of a departed
Title:  prophet and seer of his island, who, by those hieroglyphic marks, had
Title:  written out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and the
Title:  earth, and a mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth; so that
Title:  Queequeg in his own proper person was a riddle to unfold; a wondrous
Title:  work in one volume; but whose mysteries not even himself could read,
Title:  though his own live heart beat against them; and these mysteries were
Title:  therefore destined in the end to moulder away with the living
Title:  parchment whereon they were inscribed, and so be unsolved to the
Title:  last.  And this thought it must have been which suggested to Ahab
Title:  that wild exclamation of his, when one morning turning away from
Title:  surveying poor Queequeg--"Oh, devilish tantalization of the gods!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 111
Title:  
Title:  The Pacific.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great
Title:  South Sea; were it not for other things, I could have greeted my dear
Title:  Pacific with uncounted thanks, for now the long supplication of my
Title:  youth was answered; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a
Title:  thousand leagues of blue.
Title:  
Title:  There is, one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea, whose
Title:  gently awful stirrings seem to speak of some hidden soul beneath;
Title:  like those fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried
Title:  Evangelist St. John.  And meet it is, that over these sea-pastures,
Title:  wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters' Fields of all four
Title:  continents, the waves should rise and fall, and ebb and flow
Title:  unceasingly; for here, millions of mixed shades and shadows, drowned
Title:  dreams, somnambulisms, reveries; all that we call lives and souls,
Title:  lie dreaming, dreaming, still; tossing like slumberers in their beds;
Title:  the ever-rolling waves but made so by their restlessness.
Title:  
Title:  To any meditative Magian rover, this serene Pacific, once beheld,
Title:  must ever after be the sea of his adoption.  It rolls the midmost
Title:  waters of the world, the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but its
Title:  arms.  The same waves wash the moles of the new-built Californian
Title:  towns, but yesterday planted by the recentest race of men, and lave
Title:  the faded but still gorgeous skirts of Asiatic lands, older than
Title:  Abraham; while all between float milky-ways of coral isles, and
Title:  low-lying, endless, unknown Archipelagoes, and impenetrable Japans.
Title:  Thus this mysterious, divine Pacific zones the world's whole bulk
Title:  about; makes all coasts one bay to it; seems the tide-beating heart
Title:  of earth.  Lifted by those eternal swells, you needs must own the
Title:  seductive god, bowing your head to Pan.
Title:  
Title:  But few thoughts of Pan stirred Ahab's brain, as standing like an
Title:  iron statue at his accustomed place beside the mizen rigging, with
Title:  one nostril he unthinkingly snuffed the sugary musk from the Bashee
Title:  isles (in whose sweet woods mild lovers must be walking), and with
Title:  the other consciously inhaled the salt breath of the new found sea;
Title:  that sea in which the hated White Whale must even then be swimming.
Title:  Launched at length upon these almost final waters, and gliding
Title:  towards the Japanese cruising-ground, the old man's purpose
Title:  intensified itself.  His firm lips met like the lips of a vice; the
Title:  Delta of his forehead's veins swelled like overladen brooks; in his
Title:  very sleep, his ringing cry ran through the vaulted hull, "Stern all!
Title:  the White Whale spouts thick blood!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 112
Title:  
Title:  The Blacksmith.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Availing himself of the mild, summer-cool weather that now reigned
Title:  in these latitudes, and in preparation for the peculiarly active
Title:  pursuits shortly to be anticipated, Perth, the begrimed, blistered
Title:  old blacksmith, had not removed his portable forge to the hold again,
Title:  after concluding his contributory work for Ahab's leg, but still
Title:  retained it on deck, fast lashed to ringbolts by the foremast; being
Title:  now almost incessantly invoked by the headsmen, and harpooneers, and
Title:  bowsmen to do some little job for them; altering, or repairing, or
Title:  new shaping their various weapons and boat furniture.  Often he would
Title:  be surrounded by an eager circle, all waiting to be served; holding
Title:  boat-spades, pike-heads, harpoons, and lances, and jealously watching
Title:  his every sooty movement, as he toiled.  Nevertheless, this old man's
Title:  was a patient hammer wielded by a patient arm.  No murmur, no
Title:  impatience, no petulance did come from him.  Silent, slow, and
Title:  solemn; bowing over still further his chronically broken back, he
Title:  toiled away, as if toil were life itself, and the heavy beating of
Title:  his hammer the heavy beating of his heart.  And so it was.--Most
Title:  miserable!
Title:  
Title:  A peculiar walk in this old man, a certain slight but painful
Title:  appearing yawing in his gait, had at an early period of the voyage
Title:  excited the curiosity of the mariners.  And to the importunity of
Title:  their persisted questionings he had finally given in; and so it came
Title:  to pass that every one now knew the shameful story of his wretched
Title:  fate.
Title:  
Title:  Belated, and not innocently, one bitter winter's midnight, on the
Title:  road running between two country towns, the blacksmith half-stupidly
Title:  felt the deadly numbness stealing over him, and sought refuge in a
Title:  leaning, dilapidated barn.  The issue was, the loss of the
Title:  extremities of both feet.  Out of this revelation, part by part, at
Title:  last came out the four acts of the gladness, and the one long, and as
Title:  yet uncatastrophied fifth act of the grief of his life's drama.
Title:  
Title:  He was an old man, who, at the age of nearly sixty, had postponedly
Title:  encountered that thing in sorrow's technicals called ruin.  He had
Title:  been an artisan of famed excellence, and with plenty to do; owned a
Title:  house and garden; embraced a youthful, daughter-like, loving wife,
Title:  and three blithe, ruddy children; every Sunday went to a
Title:  cheerful-looking church, planted in a grove.  But one night, under
Title:  cover of darkness, and further concealed in a most cunning
Title:  disguisement, a desperate burglar slid into his happy home, and
Title:  robbed them all of everything.  And darker yet to tell, the
Title:  blacksmith himself did ignorantly conduct this burglar into his
Title:  family's heart.  It was the Bottle Conjuror!  Upon the opening of
Title:  that fatal cork, forth flew the fiend, and shrivelled up his home.
Title:  Now, for prudent, most wise, and economic reasons, the blacksmith's
Title:  shop was in the basement of his dwelling, but with a separate
Title:  entrance to it; so that always had the young and loving healthy wife
Title:  listened with no unhappy nervousness, but with vigorous pleasure, to
Title:  the stout ringing of her young-armed old husband's hammer; whose
Title:  reverberations, muffled by passing through the floors and walls, came
Title:  up to her, not unsweetly, in her nursery; and so, to stout Labor's
Title:  iron lullaby, the blacksmith's infants were rocked to slumber.
Title:  
Title:  Oh, woe on woe!  Oh, Death, why canst thou not sometimes be timely?
Title:  Hadst thou taken this old blacksmith to thyself ere his full ruin
Title:  came upon him, then had the young widow had a delicious grief, and
Title:  her orphans a truly venerable, legendary sire to dream of in their
Title:  after years; and all of them a care-killing competency.  But Death
Title:  plucked down some virtuous elder brother, on whose whistling daily
Title:  toil solely hung the responsibilities of some other family, and left
Title:  the worse than useless old man standing, till the hideous rot of life
Title:  should make him easier to harvest.
Title:  
Title:  Why tell the whole?  The blows of the basement hammer every day grew
Title:  more and more between; and each blow every day grew fainter than the
Title:  last; the wife sat frozen at the window, with tearless eyes,
Title:  glitteringly gazing into the weeping faces of her children; the
Title:  bellows fell; the forge choked up with cinders; the house was sold;
Title:  the mother dived down into the long church-yard grass; her children
Title:  twice followed her thither; and the houseless, familyless old man
Title:  staggered off a vagabond in crape; his every woe unreverenced; his
Title:  grey head a scorn to flaxen curls!
Title:  
Title:  Death seems the only desirable sequel for a career like this; but
Title:  Death is only a launching into the region of the strange Untried; it
Title:  is but the first salutation to the possibilities of the immense
Title:  Remote, the Wild, the Watery, the Unshored; therefore, to the
Title:  death-longing eyes of such men, who still have left in them some
Title:  interior compunctions against suicide, does the all-contributed and
Title:  all-receptive ocean alluringly spread forth his whole plain of
Title:  unimaginable, taking terrors, and wonderful, new-life adventures; and
Title:  from the hearts of infinite Pacifics, the thousand mermaids sing to
Title:  them--"Come hither, broken-hearted; here is another life without the
Title:  guilt of intermediate death; here are wonders supernatural, without
Title:  dying for them.  Come hither! bury thyself in a life which, to your
Title:  now equally abhorred and abhorring, landed world, is more oblivious
Title:  than death.  Come hither! put up THY gravestone, too, within the
Title:  churchyard, and come hither, till we marry thee!"
Title:  
Title:  Hearkening to these voices, East and West, by early sunrise, and by
Title:  fall of eve, the blacksmith's soul responded, Aye, I come!  And so
Title:  Perth went a-whaling.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 113
Title:  
Title:  The Forge.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  With matted beard, and swathed in a bristling shark-skin apron, about
Title:  mid-day, Perth was standing between his forge and anvil, the latter
Title:  placed upon an iron-wood log, with one hand holding a pike-head in
Title:  the coals, and with the other at his forge's lungs, when Captain Ahab
Title:  came along, carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking leathern bag.
Title:  While yet a little distance from the forge, moody Ahab paused; till
Title:  at last, Perth, withdrawing his iron from the fire, began hammering
Title:  it upon the anvil--the red mass sending off the sparks in thick
Title:  hovering flights, some of which flew close to Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  "Are these thy Mother Carey's chickens, Perth? they are always flying
Title:  in thy wake; birds of good omen, too, but not to all;--look here,
Title:  they burn; but thou--thou liv'st among them without a scorch."
Title:  
Title:  "Because I am scorched all over, Captain Ahab," answered Perth,
Title:  resting for a moment on his hammer; "I am past scorching; not easily
Title:  can'st thou scorch a scar."
Title:  
Title:  "Well, well; no more.  Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly, sanely
Title:  woeful to me.  In no Paradise myself, I am impatient of all misery in
Title:  others that is not mad.  Thou should'st go mad, blacksmith; say, why
Title:  dost thou not go mad?  How can'st thou endure without being mad?  Do
Title:  the heavens yet hate thee, that thou can'st not go mad?--What wert
Title:  thou making there?"
Title:  
Title:  "Welding an old pike-head, sir; there were seams and dents in it."
Title:  
Title:  "And can'st thou make it all smooth again, blacksmith, after such
Title:  hard usage as it had?"
Title:  
Title:  "I think so, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "And I suppose thou can'st smoothe almost any seams and dents; never
Title:  mind how hard the metal, blacksmith?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, sir, I think I can; all seams and dents but one."
Title:  
Title:  "Look ye here, then," cried Ahab, passionately advancing, and leaning
Title:  with both hands on Perth's shoulders; "look ye here--HERE--can ye
Title:  smoothe out a seam like this, blacksmith," sweeping one hand across
Title:  his ribbed brow; "if thou could'st, blacksmith, glad enough would I
Title:  lay my head upon thy anvil, and feel thy heaviest hammer between my
Title:  eyes.  Answer!  Can'st thou smoothe this seam?"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh! that is the one, sir!  Said I not all seams and dents but one?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, blacksmith, it is the one; aye, man, it is unsmoothable; for
Title:  though thou only see'st it here in my flesh, it has worked down into
Title:  the bone of my skull--THAT is all wrinkles!  But, away with child's
Title:  play; no more gaffs and pikes to-day.  Look ye here!" jingling the
Title:  leathern bag, as if it were full of gold coins.  "I, too, want a
Title:  harpoon made; one that a thousand yoke of fiends could not part,
Title:  Perth; something that will stick in a whale like his own fin-bone.
Title:  There's the stuff," flinging the pouch upon the anvil.  "Look ye,
Title:  blacksmith, these are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel shoes of
Title:  racing horses."
Title:  
Title:  "Horse-shoe stubbs, sir?  Why, Captain Ahab, thou hast here, then,
Title:  the best and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work."
Title:  
Title:  "I know it, old man; these stubbs will weld together like glue from
Title:  the melted bones of murderers.  Quick! forge me the harpoon.  And
Title:  forge me first, twelve rods for its shank; then wind, and twist, and
Title:  hammer these twelve together like the yarns and strands of a
Title:  tow-line.  Quick!  I'll blow the fire."
Title:  
Title:  When at last the twelve rods were made, Ahab tried them, one by one,
Title:  by spiralling them, with his own hand, round a long, heavy iron bolt.
Title:  "A flaw!" rejecting the last one.  "Work that over again, Perth."
Title:  
Title:  This done, Perth was about to begin welding the twelve into one, when
Title:  Ahab stayed his hand, and said he would weld his own iron.  As, then,
Title:  with regular, gasping hems, he hammered on the anvil, Perth passing
Title:  to him the glowing rods, one after the other, and the hard pressed
Title:  forge shooting up its intense straight flame, the Parsee passed
Title:  silently, and bowing over his head towards the fire, seemed invoking
Title:  some curse or some blessing on the toil.  But, as Ahab looked up, he
Title:  slid aside.
Title:  
Title:  "What's that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for?" muttered
Title:  Stubb, looking on from the forecastle.  "That Parsee smells fire like
Title:  a fusee; and smells of it himself, like a hot musket's powder-pan."
Title:  
Title:  At last the shank, in one complete rod, received its final heat; and
Title:  as Perth, to temper it, plunged it all hissing into the cask of water
Title:  near by, the scalding steam shot up into Ahab's bent face.
Title:  
Title:  "Would'st thou brand me, Perth?" wincing for a moment with the pain;
Title:  "have I been but forging my own branding-iron, then?"
Title:  
Title:  "Pray God, not that; yet I fear something, Captain Ahab.  Is not this
Title:  harpoon for the White Whale?"
Title:  
Title:  "For the white fiend!  But now for the barbs; thou must make them
Title:  thyself, man.  Here are my razors--the best of steel; here, and make
Title:  the barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea."
Title:  
Title:  For a moment, the old blacksmith eyed the razors as though he would
Title:  fain not use them.
Title:  
Title:  "Take them, man, I have no need for them; for I now neither shave,
Title:  sup, nor pray till--but here--to work!"
Title:  
Title:  Fashioned at last into an arrowy shape, and welded by Perth to the
Title:  shank, the steel soon pointed the end of the iron; and as the
Title:  blacksmith was about giving the barbs their final heat, prior to
Title:  tempering them, he cried to Ahab to place the water-cask near.
Title:  
Title:  "No, no--no water for that; I want it of the true death-temper.
Title:  Ahoy, there!  Tashtego, Queequeg, Daggoo!  What say ye, pagans!  Will
Title:  ye give me as much blood as will cover this barb?" holding it high
Title:  up.  A cluster of dark nods replied, Yes.  Three punctures were made
Title:  in the heathen flesh, and the White Whale's barbs were then tempered.
Title:  
Title:  "Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris, sed in nomine diaboli!"
Title:  deliriously howled Ahab, as the malignant iron scorchingly devoured
Title:  the baptismal blood.
Title:  
Title:  Now, mustering the spare poles from below, and selecting one of
Title:  hickory, with the bark still investing it, Ahab fitted the end to the
Title:  socket of the iron.  A coil of new tow-line was then unwound, and
Title:  some fathoms of it taken to the windlass, and stretched to a great
Title:  tension.  Pressing his foot upon it, till the rope hummed like a
Title:  harp-string, then eagerly bending over it, and seeing no strandings,
Title:  Ahab exclaimed, "Good! and now for the seizings."
Title:  
Title:  At one extremity the rope was unstranded, and the separate spread
Title:  yarns were all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon; the
Title:  pole was then driven hard up into the socket; from the lower end the
Title:  rope was traced half-way along the pole's length, and firmly secured
Title:  so, with intertwistings of twine.  This done, pole, iron, and
Title:  rope--like the Three Fates--remained inseparable, and Ahab moodily
Title:  stalked away with the weapon; the sound of his ivory leg, and the
Title:  sound of the hickory pole, both hollowly ringing along every plank.
Title:  But ere he entered his cabin, light, unnatural, half-bantering, yet
Title:  most piteous sound was heard.  Oh, Pip! thy wretched laugh, thy
Title:  idle but unresting eye; all thy strange mummeries not unmeaningly
Title:  blended with the black tragedy of the melancholy ship, and mocked it!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 114
Title:  
Title:  The Gilder.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese
Title:  cruising ground, the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery.
Title:  Often, in mild, pleasant weather, for twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and
Title:  twenty hours on the stretch, they were engaged in the boats, steadily
Title:  pulling, or sailing, or paddling after the whales, or for an
Title:  interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their uprising;
Title:  though with but small success for their pains.
Title:  
Title:  At such times, under an abated sun; afloat all day upon smooth, slow
Title:  heaving swells; seated in his boat, light as a birch canoe; and so
Title:  sociably mixing with the soft waves themselves, that like
Title:  hearth-stone cats they purr against the gunwale; these are the times
Title:  of dreamy quietude, when beholding the tranquil beauty and brilliancy
Title:  of the ocean's skin, one forgets the tiger heart that pants beneath
Title:  it; and would not willingly remember, that this velvet paw but
Title:  conceals a remorseless fang.
Title:  
Title:  These are the times, when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a
Title:  certain filial, confident, land-like feeling towards the sea; that he
Title:  regards it as so much flowery earth; and the distant ship revealing
Title:  only the tops of her masts, seems struggling forward, not through
Title:  high rolling waves, but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie:
Title:  as when the western emigrants' horses only show their erected ears,
Title:  while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure.
Title:  
Title:  The long-drawn virgin vales; the mild blue hill-sides; as over these
Title:  there steals the hush, the hum; you almost swear that play-wearied
Title:  children lie sleeping in these solitudes, in some glad May-time, when
Title:  the flowers of the woods are plucked.  And all this mixes with your
Title:  most mystic mood; so that fact and fancy, half-way meeting,
Title:  interpenetrate, and form one seamless whole.
Title:  
Title:  Nor did such soothing scenes, however temporary, fail of at least as
Title:  temporary an effect on Ahab.  But if these secret golden keys did
Title:  seem to open in him his own secret golden treasuries, yet did his
Title:  breath upon them prove but tarnishing.
Title:  
Title:  Oh, grassy glades! oh, ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul; in
Title:  ye,--though long parched by the dead drought of the earthy
Title:  life,--in ye, men yet may roll, like young horses in new morning
Title:  clover; and for some few fleeting moments, feel the cool dew of the
Title:  life immortal on them.  Would to God these blessed calms would last.
Title:  But the mingled, mingling threads of life are woven by warp and woof:
Title:  calms crossed by storms, a storm for every calm.  There is no steady
Title:  unretracing progress in this life; we do not advance through fixed
Title:  gradations, and at the last one pause:--through infancy's unconscious
Title:  spell, boyhood's thoughtless faith, adolescence' doubt (the common
Title:  doom), then scepticism, then disbelief, resting at last in manhood's
Title:  pondering repose of If.  But once gone through, we trace the round
Title:  again; and are infants, boys, and men, and Ifs eternally.  Where lies
Title:  the final harbor, whence we unmoor no more?  In what rapt ether sails
Title:  the world, of which the weariest will never weary?  Where is the
Title:  foundling's father hidden?  Our souls are like those orphans whose
Title:  unwedded mothers die in bearing them: the secret of our paternity
Title:  lies in their grave, and we must there to learn it.
Title:  
Title:  And that same day, too, gazing far down from his boat's side into
Title:  that same golden sea, Starbuck lowly murmured:--
Title:  
Title:  "Loveliness unfathomable, as ever lover saw in his young bride's
Title:  eye!--Tell me not of thy teeth-tiered sharks, and thy kidnapping
Title:  cannibal ways.  Let faith oust fact; let fancy oust memory; I look
Title:  deep down and do believe."
Title:  
Title:  And Stubb, fish-like, with sparkling scales, leaped up in that same
Title:  golden light:--
Title:  
Title:  "I am Stubb, and Stubb has his history; but here Stubb takes oaths
Title:  that he has always been jolly!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 115
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod Meets The Bachelor.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  And jolly enough were the sights and the sounds that came bearing
Title:  down before the wind, some few weeks after Ahab's harpoon had been
Title:  welded.
Title:  
Title:  It was a Nantucket ship, the Bachelor, which had just wedged in her
Title:  last cask of oil, and bolted down her bursting hatches; and now, in
Title:  glad holiday apparel, was joyously, though somewhat vain-gloriously,
Title:  sailing round among the widely-separated ships on the ground,
Title:  previous to pointing her prow for home.
Title:  
Title:  The three men at her mast-head wore long streamers of narrow red
Title:  bunting at their hats; from the stern, a whale-boat was suspended,
Title:  bottom down; and hanging captive from the bowsprit was seen the long
Title:  lower jaw of the last whale they had slain.  Signals, ensigns, and
Title:  jacks of all colours were flying from her rigging, on every side.
Title:  Sideways lashed in each of her three basketed tops were two barrels
Title:  of sperm; above which, in her top-mast cross-trees, you saw slender
Title:  breakers of the same precious fluid; and nailed to her main truck was
Title:  a brazen lamp.
Title:  
Title:  As was afterwards learned, the Bachelor had met with the most
Title:  surprising success; all the more wonderful, for that while cruising
Title:  in the same seas numerous other vessels had gone entire months
Title:  without securing a single fish.  Not only had barrels of beef and
Title:  bread been given away to make room for the far more valuable sperm,
Title:  but additional supplemental casks had been bartered for, from the
Title:  ships she had met; and these were stowed along the deck, and in the
Title:  captain's and officers' state-rooms.  Even the cabin table itself
Title:  had been knocked into kindling-wood; and the cabin mess dined off the
Title:  broad head of an oil-butt, lashed down to the floor for a
Title:  centrepiece.  In the forecastle, the sailors had actually caulked
Title:  and pitched their chests, and filled them; it was humorously added,
Title:  that the cook had clapped a head on his largest boiler, and filled
Title:  it; that the steward had plugged his spare coffee-pot and filled it;
Title:  that the harpooneers had headed the sockets of their irons and filled
Title:  them; that indeed everything was filled with sperm, except the
Title:  captain's pantaloons pockets, and those he reserved to thrust his
Title:  hands into, in self-complacent testimony of his entire satisfaction.
Title:  
Title:  As this glad ship of good luck bore down upon the moody Pequod, the
Title:  barbarian sound of enormous drums came from her forecastle; and
Title:  drawing still nearer, a crowd of her men were seen standing round her
Title:  huge try-pots, which, covered with the parchment-like POKE or stomach
Title:  skin of the black fish, gave forth a loud roar to every stroke of the
Title:  clenched hands of the crew.  On the quarter-deck, the mates and
Title:  harpooneers were dancing with the olive-hued girls who had eloped
Title:  with them from the Polynesian Isles; while suspended in an
Title:  ornamented boat, firmly secured aloft between the foremast and
Title:  mainmast, three Long Island negroes, with glittering fiddle-bows of
Title:  whale ivory, were presiding over the hilarious jig.  Meanwhile,
Title:  others of the ship's company were tumultuously busy at the masonry of
Title:  the try-works, from which the huge pots had been removed.  You would
Title:  have almost thought they were pulling down the cursed Bastille, such
Title:  wild cries they raised, as the now useless brick and mortar were
Title:  being hurled into the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Lord and master over all this scene, the captain stood erect on the
Title:  ship's elevated quarter-deck, so that the whole rejoicing drama was
Title:  full before him, and seemed merely contrived for his own individual
Title:  diversion.
Title:  
Title:  And Ahab, he too was standing on his quarter-deck, shaggy and black,
Title:  with a stubborn gloom; and as the two ships crossed each other's
Title:  wakes--one all jubilations for things passed, the other all
Title:  forebodings as to things to come--their two captains in themselves
Title:  impersonated the whole striking contrast of the scene.
Title:  
Title:  "Come aboard, come aboard!" cried the gay Bachelor's commander,
Title:  lifting a glass and a bottle in the air.
Title:  
Title:  "Hast seen the White Whale?" gritted Ahab in reply.
Title:  
Title:  "No; only heard of him; but don't believe in him at all," said the
Title:  other good-humoredly.  "Come aboard!"
Title:  
Title:  "Thou art too damned jolly.  Sail on.  Hast lost any men?"
Title:  
Title:  "Not enough to speak of--two islanders, that's all;--but come aboard,
Title:  old hearty, come along.  I'll soon take that black from your brow.
Title:  Come along, will ye (merry's the play); a full ship and
Title:  homeward-bound."
Title:  
Title:  "How wondrous familiar is a fool!" muttered Ahab; then aloud, "Thou
Title:  art a full ship and homeward bound, thou sayst; well, then, call me
Title:  an empty ship, and outward-bound.  So go thy ways, and I will mine.
Title:  Forward there!  Set all sail, and keep her to the wind!"
Title:  
Title:  And thus, while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze, the
Title:  other stubbornly fought against it; and so the two vessels parted;
Title:  the crew of the Pequod looking with grave, lingering glances towards
Title:  the receding Bachelor; but the Bachelor's men never heeding their
Title:  gaze for the lively revelry they were in.  And as Ahab, leaning over
Title:  the taffrail, eyed the homewardbound craft, he took from his pocket a
Title:  small vial of sand, and then looking from the ship to the vial,
Title:  seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together, for that
Title:  vial was filled with Nantucket soundings.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 116
Title:  
Title:  The Dying Whale.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Not seldom in this life, when, on the right side, fortune's favourites
Title:  sail close by us, we, though all adroop before, catch somewhat of the
Title:  rushing breeze, and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out.  So
Title:  seemed it with the Pequod.  For next day after encountering the gay
Title:  Bachelor, whales were seen and four were slain; and one of them by
Title:  Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  It was far down the afternoon; and when all the spearings of the
Title:  crimson fight were done: and floating in the lovely sunset sea and
Title:  sky, sun and whale both stilly died together; then, such a sweetness
Title:  and such plaintiveness, such inwreathing orisons curled up in that
Title:  rosy air, that it almost seemed as if far over from the deep green
Title:  convent valleys of the Manilla isles, the Spanish land-breeze,
Title:  wantonly turned sailor, had gone to sea, freighted with these vesper
Title:  hymns.
Title:  
Title:  Soothed again, but only soothed to deeper gloom, Ahab, who had
Title:  sterned off from the whale, sat intently watching his final wanings
Title:  from the now tranquil boat.  For that strange spectacle observable in
Title:  all sperm whales dying--the turning sunwards of the head, and so
Title:  expiring--that strange spectacle, beheld of such a placid evening,
Title:  somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown before.
Title:  
Title:  "He turns and turns him to it,--how slowly, but how steadfastly, his
Title:  homage-rendering and invoking brow, with his last dying motions.  He
Title:  too worships fire; most faithful, broad, baronial vassal of the
Title:  sun!--Oh that these too-favouring eyes should see these too-favouring
Title:  sights.  Look! here, far water-locked; beyond all hum of human weal
Title:  or woe; in these most candid and impartial seas; where to traditions
Title:  no rocks furnish tablets; where for long Chinese ages, the billows
Title:  have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to, as stars that shine
Title:  upon the Niger's unknown source; here, too, life dies sunwards full
Title:  of faith; but see! no sooner dead, than death whirls round the
Title:  corpse, and it heads some other way.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, thou dark Hindoo half of nature, who of drowned bones hast
Title:  builded thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these
Title:  unverdured seas; thou art an infidel, thou queen, and too truly
Title:  speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering Typhoon, and the hushed
Title:  burial of its after calm.  Nor has this thy whale sunwards turned his
Title:  dying head, and then gone round again, without a lesson to me.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, trebly hooped and welded hip of power!  Oh, high aspiring,
Title:  rainbowed jet!--that one strivest, this one jettest all in vain!  In
Title:  vain, oh whale, dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening
Title:  sun, that only calls forth life, but gives it not again.  Yet dost
Title:  thou, darker half, rock me with a prouder, if a darker faith.  All
Title:  thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me here; I am buoyed by
Title:  breaths of once living things, exhaled as air, but water now.
Title:  
Title:  "Then hail, for ever hail, O sea, in whose eternal tossings the wild
Title:  fowl finds his only rest.  Born of earth, yet suckled by the sea;
Title:  though hill and valley mothered me, ye billows are my
Title:  foster-brothers!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 117
Title:  
Title:  The Whale Watch.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart; one, far to
Title:  windward; one, less distant, to leeward; one ahead; one astern.
Title:  These last three were brought alongside ere nightfall; but the
Title:  windward one could not be reached till morning; and the boat that had
Title:  killed it lay by its side all night; and that boat was Ahab's.
Title:  
Title:  The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale's spout-hole;
Title:  and the lantern hanging from its top, cast a troubled flickering
Title:  glare upon the black, glossy back, and far out upon the midnight
Title:  waves, which gently chafed the whale's broad flank, like soft surf
Title:  upon a beach.
Title:  
Title:  Ahab and all his boat's crew seemed asleep but the Parsee; who
Title:  crouching in the bow, sat watching the sharks, that spectrally played
Title:  round the whale, and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails.
Title:  A sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven
Title:  ghosts of Gomorrah, ran shuddering through the air.
Title:  
Title:  Started from his slumbers, Ahab, face to face, saw the Parsee; and
Title:  hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a
Title:  flooded world.  "I have dreamed it again," said he.
Title:  
Title:  "Of the hearses?  Have I not said, old man, that neither hearse nor
Title:  coffin can be thine?"
Title:  
Title:  "And who are hearsed that die on the sea?"
Title:  
Title:  "But I said, old man, that ere thou couldst die on this voyage, two
Title:  hearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea; the first not made by
Title:  mortal hands; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in
Title:  America."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye! a strange sight that, Parsee:--a hearse and its plumes
Title:  floating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers.  Ha!
Title:  Such a sight we shall not soon see."
Title:  
Title:  "Believe it or not, thou canst not die till it be seen, old man."
Title:  
Title:  "And what was that saying about thyself?"
Title:  
Title:  "Though it come to the last, I shall still go before thee thy pilot."
Title:  
Title:  "And when thou art so gone before--if that ever befall--then ere I
Title:  can follow, thou must still appear to me, to pilot me still?--Was it
Title:  not so?  Well, then, did I believe all ye say, oh my pilot!  I have
Title:  here two pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it."
Title:  
Title:  "Take another pledge, old man," said the Parsee, as his eyes lighted
Title:  up like fire-flies in the gloom--"Hemp only can kill thee."
Title:  
Title:  "The gallows, ye mean.--I am immortal then, on land and on sea,"
Title:  cried Ahab, with a laugh of derision;--"Immortal on land and on sea!"
Title:  
Title:  Both were silent again, as one man.  The grey dawn came on, and the
Title:  slumbering crew arose from the boat's bottom, and ere noon the dead
Title:  whale was brought to the ship.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 118
Title:  
Title:  The Quadrant.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The season for the Line at length drew near; and every day when Ahab,
Title:  coming from his cabin, cast his eyes aloft, the vigilant helmsman
Title:  would ostentatiously handle his spokes, and the eager mariners
Title:  quickly run to the braces, and would stand there with all their eyes
Title:  centrally fixed on the nailed doubloon; impatient for the order to
Title:  point the ship's prow for the equator.  In good time the order came.
Title:  It was hard upon high noon; and Ahab, seated in the bows of his
Title:  high-hoisted boat, was about taking his wonted daily observation of
Title:  the sun to determine his latitude.
Title:  
Title:  Now, in that Japanese sea, the days in summer are as freshets of
Title:  effulgences.  That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing
Title:  focus of the glassy ocean's immeasurable burning-glass.  The sky
Title:  looks lacquered; clouds there are none; the horizon floats; and this
Title:  nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the insufferable splendors of
Title:  God's throne.  Well that Ahab's quadrant was furnished with coloured
Title:  glasses, through which to take sight of that solar fire.  So,
Title:  swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship, and with his
Title:  astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye, he remained in
Title:  that posture for some moments to catch the precise instant when the
Title:  sun should gain its precise meridian.  Meantime while his whole
Title:  attention was absorbed, the Parsee was kneeling beneath him on the
Title:  ship's deck, and with face thrown up like Ahab's, was eyeing the same
Title:  sun with him; only the lids of his eyes half hooded their orbs, and
Title:  his wild face was subdued to an earthly passionlessness.  At length
Title:  the desired observation was taken; and with his pencil upon his ivory
Title:  leg, Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at that precise
Title:  instant.  Then falling into a moment's revery, he again looked up
Title:  towards the sun and murmured to himself: "Thou sea-mark! thou high
Title:  and mighty Pilot! thou tellest me truly where I AM--but canst thou
Title:  cast the least hint where I SHALL be?  Or canst thou tell where some
Title:  other thing besides me is this moment living?  Where is Moby Dick?
Title:  This instant thou must be eyeing him.  These eyes of mine look into
Title:  the very eye that is even now beholding him; aye, and into the eye
Title:  that is even now equally beholding the objects on the unknown,
Title:  thither side of thee, thou sun!"
Title:  
Title:  Then gazing at his quadrant, and handling, one after the other, its
Title:  numerous cabalistical contrivances, he pondered again, and muttered:
Title:  "Foolish toy! babies' plaything of haughty Admirals, and Commodores,
Title:  and Captains; the world brags of thee, of thy cunning and might; but
Title:  what after all canst thou do, but tell the poor, pitiful point, where
Title:  thou thyself happenest to be on this wide planet, and the hand that
Title:  holds thee: no! not one jot more!  Thou canst not tell where one drop
Title:  of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon; and yet with
Title:  thy impotence thou insultest the sun!  Science!  Curse thee, thou
Title:  vain toy; and cursed be all the things that cast man's eyes aloft to
Title:  that heaven, whose live vividness but scorches him, as these old eyes
Title:  are even now scorched with thy light, O sun!  Level by nature to this
Title:  earth's horizon are the glances of man's eyes; not shot from the
Title:  crown of his head, as if God had meant him to gaze on his firmament.
Title:  Curse thee, thou quadrant!" dashing it to the deck, "no longer will I
Title:  guide my earthly way by thee; the level ship's compass, and the level
Title:  deadreckoning, by log and by line; THESE shall conduct me, and show
Title:  me my place on the sea.  Aye," lighting from the boat to the deck,
Title:  "thus I trample on thee, thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on
Title:  high; thus I split and destroy thee!"
Title:  
Title:  As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and
Title:  dead feet, a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab, and a
Title:  fatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself--these passed over
Title:  the mute, motionless Parsee's face.  Unobserved he rose and glided
Title:  away; while, awestruck by the aspect of their commander, the seamen
Title:  clustered together on the forecastle, till Ahab, troubledly pacing
Title:  the deck, shouted out--"To the braces!  Up helm!--square in!"
Title:  
Title:  In an instant the yards swung round; and as the ship half-wheeled
Title:  upon her heel, her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised
Title:  upon her long, ribbed hull, seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting
Title:  on one sufficient steed.
Title:  
Title:  Standing between the knight-heads, Starbuck watched the Pequod's
Title:  tumultuous way, and Ahab's also, as he went lurching along the deck.
Title:  
Title:  "I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow, full
Title:  of its tormented flaming life; and I have seen it wane at last, down,
Title:  down, to dumbest dust.  Old man of oceans! of all this fiery life of
Title:  thine, what will at length remain but one little heap of ashes!"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye," cried Stubb, "but sea-coal ashes--mind ye that, Mr.
Title:  Starbuck--sea-coal, not your common charcoal.  Well, well; I heard
Title:  Ahab mutter, 'Here some one thrusts these cards into these old hands
Title:  of mine; swears that I must play them, and no others.'  And damn me,
Title:  Ahab, but thou actest right; live in the game, and die in it!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 119
Title:  
Title:  The Candles.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs: the tiger of Bengal
Title:  crouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure.  Skies the most
Title:  effulgent but basket the deadliest thunders: gorgeous Cuba knows
Title:  tornadoes that never swept tame northern lands.  So, too, it is, that
Title:  in these resplendent Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst
Title:  of all storms, the Typhoon.  It will sometimes burst from out that
Title:  cloudless sky, like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town.
Title:  
Title:  Towards evening of that day, the Pequod was torn of her canvas, and
Title:  bare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly
Title:  ahead.  When darkness came on, sky and sea roared and split with the
Title:  thunder, and blazed with the lightning, that showed the disabled
Title:  masts fluttering here and there with the rags which the first fury of
Title:  the tempest had left for its after sport.
Title:  
Title:  Holding by a shroud, Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck; at
Title:  every flash of the lightning glancing aloft, to see what additional
Title:  disaster might have befallen the intricate hamper there; while Stubb
Title:  and Flask were directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmer
Title:  lashing of the boats.  But all their pains seemed naught.  Though
Title:  lifted to the very top of the cranes, the windward quarter boat
Title:  (Ahab's) did not escape.  A great rolling sea, dashing high up
Title:  against the reeling ship's high teetering side, stove in the boat's
Title:  bottom at the stern, and left it again, all dripping through like a
Title:  sieve.
Title:  
Title:  "Bad work, bad work!  Mr. Starbuck," said Stubb, regarding the wreck,
Title:  "but the sea will have its way.  Stubb, for one, can't fight it.  You
Title:  see, Mr. Starbuck, a wave has such a great long start before it
Title:  leaps, all round the world it runs, and then comes the spring!  But
Title:  as for me, all the start I have to meet it, is just across the deck
Title:  here.  But never mind; it's all in fun: so the old song
Title:  says;"--(SINGS.)
Title:  
Title:  Oh! jolly is the gale,
Title:  And a joker is the whale,
Title:  A' flourishin' his tail,--
Title:  Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!
Title:  
Title:  The scud all a flyin',
Title:  That's his flip only foamin';
Title:  When he stirs in the spicin',--
Title:  Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!
Title:  
Title:  Thunder splits the ships,
Title:  But he only smacks his lips,
Title:  A tastin' of this flip,--
Title:  Such a funny, sporty, gamy, jesty, joky, hoky-poky lad, is the Ocean, oh!
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Avast Stubb," cried Starbuck, "let the Typhoon sing, and strike his
Title:  harp here in our rigging; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold
Title:  thy peace."
Title:  
Title:  "But I am not a brave man; never said I was a brave man; I am a
Title:  coward; and I sing to keep up my spirits.  And I tell you what it is,
Title:  Mr. Starbuck, there's no way to stop my singing in this world but to
Title:  cut my throat.  And when that's done, ten to one I sing ye the
Title:  doxology for a wind-up."
Title:  
Title:  "Madman! look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own."
Title:  
Title:  "What! how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else,
Title:  never mind how foolish?"
Title:  
Title:  "Here!" cried Starbuck, seizing Stubb by the shoulder, and pointing
Title:  his hand towards the weather bow, "markest thou not that the gale
Title:  comes from the eastward, the very course Ahab is to run for Moby
Title:  Dick? the very course he swung to this day noon? now mark his boat
Title:  there; where is that stove?  In the stern-sheets, man; where he is
Title:  wont to stand--his stand-point is stove, man!  Now jump overboard,
Title:  and sing away, if thou must!
Title:  
Title:  "I don't half understand ye: what's in the wind?"
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, yes, round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to
Title:  Nantucket," soliloquized Starbuck suddenly, heedless of Stubb's
Title:  question.  "The gale that now hammers at us to stave us, we can turn
Title:  it into a fair wind that will drive us towards home.  Yonder, to
Title:  windward, all is blackness of doom; but to leeward, homeward--I see
Title:  it lightens up there; but not with the lightning."
Title:  
Title:  At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness,
Title:  following the flashes, a voice was heard at his side; and almost at
Title:  the same instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead.
Title:  
Title:  "Who's there?"
Title:  
Title:  "Old Thunder!" said Ahab, groping his way along the bulwarks to his
Title:  pivot-hole; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by
Title:  elbowed lances of fire.
Title:  
Title:  Now, as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry
Title:  off the perilous fluid into the soil; so the kindred rod which at sea
Title:  some ships carry to each mast, is intended to conduct it into the
Title:  water.  But as this conductor must descend to considerable depth,
Title:  that its end may avoid all contact with the hull; and as moreover, if
Title:  kept constantly towing there, it would be liable to many mishaps,
Title:  besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging, and more
Title:  or less impeding the vessel's way in the water; because of all this,
Title:  the lower parts of a ship's lightning-rods are not always overboard;
Title:  but are generally made in long slender links, so as to be the more
Title:  readily hauled up into the chains outside, or thrown down into the
Title:  sea, as occasion may require.
Title:  
Title:  "The rods! the rods!" cried Starbuck to the crew, suddenly admonished
Title:  to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting
Title:  flambeaux, to light Ahab to his post.  "Are they overboard? drop them
Title:  over, fore and aft.  Quick!"
Title:  
Title:  "Avast!" cried Ahab; "let's have fair play here, though we be the
Title:  weaker side.  Yet I'll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and
Title:  Andes, that all the world may be secured; but out on privileges!  Let
Title:  them be, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Look aloft!" cried Starbuck.  "The corpusants! the corpusants!
Title:  
Title:  All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire; and touched at each
Title:  tri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames, each
Title:  of the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air,
Title:  like three gigantic wax tapers before an altar.
Title:  
Title:  "Blast the boat! let it go!" cried Stubb at this instant, as a
Title:  swashing sea heaved up under his own little craft, so that its
Title:  gunwale violently jammed his hand, as he was passing a lashing.
Title:  "Blast it!"--but slipping backward on the deck, his uplifted eyes
Title:  caught the flames; and immediately shifting his tone he cried--"The
Title:  corpusants have mercy on us all!"
Title:  
Title:  To sailors, oaths are household words; they will swear in the trance
Title:  of the calm, and in the teeth of the tempest; they will imprecate
Title:  curses from the topsail-yard-arms, when most they teeter over to a
Title:  seething sea; but in all my voyagings, seldom have I heard a common
Title:  oath when God's burning finger has been laid on the ship; when His
Title:  "Mene, Mene, Tekel Upharsin" has been woven into the shrouds and the
Title:  cordage.
Title:  
Title:  While this pallidness was burning aloft, few words were heard from
Title:  the enchanted crew; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle,
Title:  all their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence, like a far away
Title:  constellation of stars.  Relieved against the ghostly light, the
Title:  gigantic jet negro, Daggoo, loomed up to thrice his real stature, and
Title:  seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come.  The parted
Title:  mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth, which strangely
Title:  gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants; while lit up by
Title:  the preternatural light, Queequeg's tattooing burned like Satanic
Title:  blue flames on his body.
Title:  
Title:  The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft; and once
Title:  more the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall.
Title:  A moment or two passed, when Starbuck, going forward, pushed against
Title:  some one.  It was Stubb.  "What thinkest thou now, man; I heard thy
Title:  cry; it was not the same in the song."
Title:  
Title:  "No, no, it wasn't; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all; and I
Title:  hope they will, still.  But do they only have mercy on long
Title:  faces?--have they no bowels for a laugh?  And look ye, Mr.
Title:  Starbuck--but it's too dark to look.  Hear me, then: I take that
Title:  mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck; for those masts are
Title:  rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a' block with sperm-oil,
Title:  d'ye see; and so, all that sperm will work up into the masts, like
Title:  sap in a tree.  Yes, our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti
Title:  candles--that's the good promise we saw."
Title:  
Title:  At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb's face slowly beginning
Title:  to glimmer into sight.  Glancing upwards, he cried: "See! see!" and
Title:  once more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed
Title:  redoubled supernaturalness in their pallor.
Title:  
Title:  "The corpusants have mercy on us all," cried Stubb, again.
Title:  
Title:  At the base of the mainmast, full beneath the doubloon and the
Title:  flame, the Parsee was kneeling in Ahab's front, but with his head
Title:  bowed away from him; while near by, from the arched and overhanging
Title:  rigging, where they had just been engaged securing a spar, a number
Title:  of the seamen, arrested by the glare, now cohered together, and hung
Title:  pendulous, like a knot of numbed wasps from a drooping, orchard twig.
Title:  In various enchanted attitudes, like the standing, or stepping, or
Title:  running skeletons in Herculaneum, others remained rooted to the deck;
Title:  but all their eyes upcast.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, men!" cried Ahab.  "Look up at it; mark it well; the white
Title:  flame but lights the way to the White Whale!  Hand me those mainmast
Title:  links there; I would fain feel this pulse, and let mine beat against
Title:  it; blood against fire!  So."
Title:  
Title:  Then turning--the last link held fast in his left hand, he put his
Title:  foot upon the Parsee; and with fixed upward eye, and high-flung right
Title:  arm, he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh! thou clear spirit of clear fire, whom on these seas I as Persian
Title:  once did worship, till in the sacramental act so burned by thee, that
Title:  to this hour I bear the scar; I now know thee, thou clear spirit, and
Title:  I now know that thy right worship is defiance.  To neither love nor
Title:  reverence wilt thou be kind; and e'en for hate thou canst but kill;
Title:  and all are killed.  No fearless fool now fronts thee.  I own thy
Title:  speechless, placeless power; but to the last gasp of my earthquake
Title:  life will dispute its unconditional, unintegral mastery in me.  In the
Title:  midst of the personified impersonal, a personality stands here.
Title:  Though but a point at best; whencesoe'er I came; wheresoe'er I go;
Title:  yet while I earthly live, the queenly personality lives in me, and
Title:  feels her royal rights.  But war is pain, and hate is woe.  Come in
Title:  thy lowest form of love, and I will kneel and kiss thee; but at thy
Title:  highest, come as mere supernal power; and though thou launchest
Title:  navies of full-freighted worlds, there's that in here that still
Title:  remains indifferent.  Oh, thou clear spirit, of thy fire thou madest
Title:  me, and like a true child of fire, I breathe it back to thee."
Title:  
Title:  [SUDDEN, REPEATED FLASHES OF LIGHTNING; THE NINE FLAMES LEAP
Title:  LENGTHWISE TO THRICE THEIR PREVIOUS HEIGHT; AHAB, WITH THE REST,
Title:  CLOSES HIS EYES, HIS RIGHT HAND PRESSED HARD UPON THEM.]
Title:  
Title:  "I own thy speechless, placeless power; said I not so?  Nor was it
Title:  wrung from me; nor do I now drop these links.  Thou canst blind; but
Title:  I can then grope.  Thou canst consume; but I can then be ashes.  Take
Title:  the homage of these poor eyes, and shutter-hands.  I would not take
Title:  it.  The lightning flashes through my skull; mine eye-balls ache and
Title:  ache; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded, and rolling on some
Title:  stunning ground.  Oh, oh!  Yet blindfold, yet will I talk to thee.
Title:  Light though thou be, thou leapest out of darkness; but I am darkness
Title:  leaping out of light, leaping out of thee!  The javelins cease; open
Title:  eyes; see, or not?  There burn the flames!  Oh, thou magnanimous! now
Title:  I do glory in my genealogy.  But thou art but my fiery father; my
Title:  sweet mother, I know not.  Oh, cruel! what hast thou done with her?
Title:  There lies my puzzle; but thine is greater.  Thou knowest not how
Title:  came ye, hence callest thyself unbegotten; certainly knowest not thy
Title:  beginning, hence callest thyself unbegun.  I know that of me, which
Title:  thou knowest not of thyself, oh, thou omnipotent.  There is some
Title:  unsuffusing thing beyond thee, thou clear spirit, to whom all thy
Title:  eternity is but time, all thy creativeness mechanical.  Through thee,
Title:  thy flaming self, my scorched eyes do dimly see it.  Oh, thou
Title:  foundling fire, thou hermit immemorial, thou too hast thy
Title:  incommunicable riddle, thy unparticipated grief.  Here again with
Title:  haughty agony, I read my sire.  Leap! leap up, and lick the sky!  I
Title:  leap with thee; I burn with thee; would fain be welded with thee;
Title:  defyingly I worship thee!"
Title:  
Title:  "The boat! the boat!" cried Starbuck, "look at thy boat, old man!"
Title:  
Title:  Ahab's harpoon, the one forged at Perth's fire, remained firmly
Title:  lashed in its conspicuous crotch, so that it projected beyond his
Title:  whale-boat's bow; but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused
Title:  the loose leather sheath to drop off; and from the keen steel barb
Title:  there now came a levelled flame of pale, forked fire.  As the silent
Title:  harpoon burned there like a serpent's tongue, Starbuck grasped Ahab
Title:  by the arm--"God, God is against thee, old man; forbear! 'tis an
Title:  ill voyage! ill begun, ill continued; let me square the yards, while
Title:  we may, old man, and make a fair wind of it homewards, to go on a
Title:  better voyage than this."
Title:  
Title:  Overhearing Starbuck, the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the
Title:  braces--though not a sail was left aloft.  For the moment all the
Title:  aghast mate's thoughts seemed theirs; they raised a half mutinous
Title:  cry.  But dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck, and
Title:  snatching the burning harpoon, Ahab waved it like a torch among them;
Title:  swearing to transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a
Title:  rope's end.  Petrified by his aspect, and still more shrinking from
Title:  the fiery dart that he held, the men fell back in dismay, and Ahab
Title:  again spoke:--
Title:  
Title:  "All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine; and
Title:  heart, soul, and body, lungs and life, old Ahab is bound.  And that
Title:  ye may know to what tune this heart beats; look ye here; thus I blow
Title:  out the last fear!"  And with one blast of his breath he extinguished
Title:  the flame.
Title:  
Title:  As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain, men fly the neighborhood
Title:  of some lone, gigantic elm, whose very height and strength but render
Title:  it so much the more unsafe, because so much the more a mark for
Title:  thunderbolts; so at those last words of Ahab's many of the mariners
Title:  did run from him in a terror of dismay.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 120
Title:  
Title:  The Deck Towards the End of the First Night Watch.
Title:  
Title:  AHAB STANDING BY THE HELM.  STARBUCK APPROACHING HIM.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  We must send down the main-top-sail yard, sir.  The band is working
Title:  loose and the lee lift is half-stranded.  Shall I strike it, sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "Strike nothing; lash it.  If I had sky-sail poles, I'd sway them up
Title:  now."
Title:  
Title:  "Sir!--in God's name!--sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well."
Title:  
Title:  "The anchors are working, sir.  Shall I get them inboard?"
Title:  
Title:  "Strike nothing, and stir nothing, but lash everything.  The wind
Title:  rises, but it has not got up to my table-lands yet.  Quick, and see
Title:  to it.--By masts and keels! he takes me for the hunch-backed skipper
Title:  of some coasting smack.  Send down my main-top-sail yard!  Ho,
Title:  gluepots!  Loftiest trucks were made for wildest winds, and this
Title:  brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud.  Shall I strike
Title:  that?  Oh, none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in tempest
Title:  time.  What a hooroosh aloft there!  I would e'en take it for
Title:  sublime, did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady.  Oh, take
Title:  medicine, take medicine!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 121
Title:  
Title:  Midnight.--The Forecastle Bulwarks.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  STUBB AND FLASK MOUNTED ON THEM, AND PASSING ADDITIONAL LASHINGS OVER
Title:  THE ANCHORS THERE HANGING.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  No, Stubb; you may pound that knot there as much as you please, but
Title:  you will never pound into me what you were just now saying.  And how
Title:  long ago is it since you said the very contrary?  Didn't you once say
Title:  that whatever ship Ahab sails in, that ship should pay something
Title:  extra on its insurance policy, just as though it were loaded with
Title:  powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers forward?  Stop, now; didn't
Title:  you say so?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well, suppose I did?  What then?  I've part changed my flesh since
Title:  that time, why not my mind?  Besides, supposing we ARE loaded with
Title:  powder barrels aft and lucifers forward; how the devil could the
Title:  lucifers get afire in this drenching spray here?  Why, my little man,
Title:  you have pretty red hair, but you couldn't get afire now.  Shake
Title:  yourself; you're Aquarius, or the water-bearer, Flask; might fill
Title:  pitchers at your coat collar.  Don't you see, then, that for these
Title:  extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees?
Title:  Here are hydrants, Flask.  But hark, again, and I'll answer ye the
Title:  other thing.  First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor
Title:  here, though, so I can pass the rope; now listen.  What's the mighty
Title:  difference between holding a mast's lightning-rod in the storm, and
Title:  standing close by a mast that hasn't got any lightning-rod at all in
Title:  a storm?  Don't you see, you timber-head, that no harm can come to
Title:  the holder of the rod, unless the mast is first struck?  What are you
Title:  talking about, then?  Not one ship in a hundred carries rods, and
Title:  Ahab,--aye, man, and all of us,--were in no more danger then, in my
Title:  poor opinion, than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing
Title:  the seas.  Why, you King-Post, you, I suppose you would have every
Title:  man in the world go about with a small lightning-rod running up the
Title:  corner of his hat, like a militia officer's skewered feather, and
Title:  trailing behind like his sash.  Why don't ye be sensible, Flask? it's
Title:  easy to be sensible; why don't ye, then? any man with half an eye can
Title:  be sensible."
Title:  
Title:  "I don't know that, Stubb.  You sometimes find it rather hard."
Title:  
Title:  "Yes, when a fellow's soaked through, it's hard to be sensible,
Title:  that's a fact.  And I am about drenched with this spray.  Never mind;
Title:  catch the turn there, and pass it.  Seems to me we are lashing down
Title:  these anchors now as if they were never going to be used again.
Title:  Tying these two anchors here, Flask, seems like tying a man's hands
Title:  behind him.  And what big generous hands they are, to be sure.  These
Title:  are your iron fists, hey?  What a hold they have, too!  I wonder,
Title:  Flask, whether the world is anchored anywhere; if she is, she swings
Title:  with an uncommon long cable, though.  There, hammer that knot down,
Title:  and we've done.  So; next to touching land, lighting on deck is the
Title:  most satisfactory.  I say, just wring out my jacket skirts, will ye?
Title:  Thank ye.  They laugh at long-togs so, Flask; but seems to me, a
Title:  Long tailed coat ought always to be worn in all storms afloat.  The
Title:  tails tapering down that way, serve to carry off the water, d'ye see.
Title:  Same with cocked hats; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs, Flask.
Title:  No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me; I must mount a
Title:  swallow-tail, and drive down a beaver; so.  Halloa! whew! there goes
Title:  my tarpaulin overboard; Lord, Lord, that the winds that come from
Title:  heaven should be so unmannerly!  This is a nasty night, lad."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 122
Title:  
Title:  Midnight Aloft.--Thunder and Lightning.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  THE MAIN-TOP-SAIL YARD.--TASHTEGO PASSING NEW LASHINGS AROUND IT.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Um, um, um.  Stop that thunder!  Plenty too much thunder up here.
Title:  What's the use of thunder?  Um, um, um.  We don't want thunder; we
Title:  want rum; give us a glass of rum.  Um, um, um!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 123
Title:  
Title:  The Musket.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon, the man at the
Title:  Pequod's jaw-bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to
Title:  the deck by its spasmodic motions, even though preventer tackles had
Title:  been attached to it--for they were slack--because some play to the
Title:  tiller was indispensable.
Title:  
Title:  In a severe gale like this, while the ship is but a tossed
Title:  shuttlecock to the blast, it is by no means uncommon to see the
Title:  needles in the compasses, at intervals, go round and round.  It was
Title:  thus with the Pequod's; at almost every shock the helmsman had not
Title:  failed to notice the whirling velocity with which they revolved upon
Title:  the cards; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold without some
Title:  sort of unwonted emotion.
Title:  
Title:  Some hours after midnight, the Typhoon abated so much, that through
Title:  the strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb--one engaged forward
Title:  and the other aft--the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and
Title:  main-top-sails were cut adrift from the spars, and went eddying away
Title:  to leeward, like the feathers of an albatross, which sometimes are
Title:  cast to the winds when that storm-tossed bird is on the wing.
Title:  
Title:  The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed, and a
Title:  storm-trysail was set further aft; so that the ship soon went through
Title:  the water with some precision again; and the course--for the present,
Title:  East-south-east--which he was to steer, if practicable, was once more
Title:  given to the helmsman.  For during the violence of the gale, he had
Title:  only steered according to its vicissitudes.  But as he was now
Title:  bringing the ship as near her course as possible, watching the
Title:  compass meanwhile, lo! a good sign! the wind seemed coming round
Title:  astern; aye, the foul breeze became fair!
Title:  
Title:  Instantly the yards were squared, to the lively song of "HO! THE FAIR
Title:  WIND! OH-YE-HO, CHEERLY MEN!" the crew singing for joy, that so
Title:  promising an event should so soon have falsified the evil portents
Title:  preceding it.
Title:  
Title:  In compliance with the standing order of his commander--to report
Title:  immediately, and at any one of the twenty-four hours, any decided
Title:  change in the affairs of the deck,--Starbuck had no sooner trimmed
Title:  the yards to the breeze--however reluctantly and gloomily,--than he
Title:  mechanically went below to apprise Captain Ahab of the circumstance.
Title:  
Title:  Ere knocking at his state-room, he involuntarily paused before it a
Title:  moment.  The cabin lamp--taking long swings this way and that--was
Title:  burning fitfully, and casting fitful shadows upon the old man's
Title:  bolted door,--a thin one, with fixed blinds inserted, in place of
Title:  upper panels.  The isolated subterraneousness of the cabin made a
Title:  certain humming silence to reign there, though it was hooped round by
Title:  all the roar of the elements.  The loaded muskets in the rack were
Title:  shiningly revealed, as they stood upright against the forward
Title:  bulkhead.  Starbuck was an honest, upright man; but out of Starbuck's
Title:  heart, at that instant when he saw the muskets, there strangely
Title:  evolved an evil thought; but so blent with its neutral or good
Title:  accompaniments that for the instant he hardly knew it for itself.
Title:  
Title:  "He would have shot me once," he murmured, "yes, there's the very
Title:  musket that he pointed at me;--that one with the studded stock; let
Title:  me touch it--lift it.  Strange, that I, who have handled so many
Title:  deadly lances, strange, that I should shake so now.  Loaded?  I must
Title:  see.  Aye, aye; and powder in the pan;--that's not good.  Best spill
Title:  it?--wait.  I'll cure myself of this.  I'll hold the musket boldly
Title:  while I think.--I come to report a fair wind to him.  But how fair?
Title:  Fair for death and doom,--THAT'S fair for Moby Dick.  It's a fair
Title:  wind that's only fair for that accursed fish.--The very tube he
Title:  pointed at me!--the very one; THIS one--I hold it here; he would have
Title:  killed me with the very thing I handle now.--Aye and he would fain
Title:  kill all his crew.  Does he not say he will not strike his spars to
Title:  any gale?  Has he not dashed his heavenly quadrant? and in these same
Title:  perilous seas, gropes he not his way by mere dead reckoning of the
Title:  error-abounding log? and in this very Typhoon, did he not swear that
Title:  he would have no lightning-rods?  But shall this crazed old man be
Title:  tamely suffered to drag a whole ship's company down to doom with
Title:  him?--Yes, it would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and
Title:  more, if this ship come to any deadly harm; and come to deadly harm,
Title:  my soul swears this ship will, if Ahab have his way.  If, then, he
Title:  were this instant--put aside, that crime would not be his.  Ha! is he
Title:  muttering in his sleep?  Yes, just there,--in there, he's sleeping.
Title:  Sleeping? aye, but still alive, and soon awake again.  I can't
Title:  withstand thee, then, old man.  Not reasoning; not remonstrance; not
Title:  entreaty wilt thou hearken to; all this thou scornest.  Flat
Title:  obedience to thy own flat commands, this is all thou breathest.  Aye,
Title:  and say'st the men have vow'd thy vow; say'st all of us are Ahabs.
Title:  Great God forbid!--But is there no other way? no lawful way?--Make
Title:  him a prisoner to be taken home?  What! hope to wrest this old man's
Title:  living power from his own living hands?  Only a fool would try it.
Title:  Say he were pinioned even; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers;
Title:  chained down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor; he would be more
Title:  hideous than a caged tiger, then.  I could not endure the sight;
Title:  could not possibly fly his howlings; all comfort, sleep itself,
Title:  inestimable reason would leave me on the long intolerable voyage.
Title:  What, then, remains?  The land is hundreds of leagues away, and
Title:  locked Japan the nearest.  I stand alone here upon an open sea, with
Title:  two oceans and a whole continent between me and law.--Aye, aye, 'tis
Title:  so.--Is heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be
Title:  murderer in his bed, tindering sheets and skin together?--And would I
Title:  be a murderer, then, if"--and slowly, stealthily, and half sideways
Title:  looking, he placed the loaded musket's end against the door.
Title:  
Title:  "On this level, Ahab's hammock swings within; his head this way.  A
Title:  touch, and Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again.--Oh
Title:  Mary!  Mary!--boy! boy! boy!--But if I wake thee not to death, old
Title:  man, who can tell to what unsounded deeps Starbuck's body this day
Title:  week may sink, with all the crew!  Great God, where art Thou?  Shall
Title:  I? shall I?--The wind has gone down and shifted, sir; the fore and
Title:  main topsails are reefed and set; she heads her course."
Title:  
Title:  "Stern all!  Oh Moby Dick, I clutch thy heart at last!"
Title:  
Title:  Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man's
Title:  tormented sleep, as if Starbuck's voice had caused the long dumb
Title:  dream to speak.
Title:  
Title:  The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard's arm against the
Title:  panel; Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel; but turning from the
Title:  door, he placed the death-tube in its rack, and left the place.
Title:  
Title:  "He's too sound asleep, Mr. Stubb; go thou down, and wake him, and
Title:  tell him.  I must see to the deck here.  Thou know'st what to say."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 124
Title:  
Title:  The Needle.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of
Title:  mighty bulk, and striving in the Pequod's gurgling track, pushed her
Title:  on like giants' palms outspread.  The strong, unstaggering breeze
Title:  abounded so, that sky and air seemed vast outbellying sails; the
Title:  whole world boomed before the wind.  Muffled in the full morning
Title:  light, the invisible sun was only known by the spread intensity of
Title:  his place; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks.  Emblazonings,
Title:  as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens, reigned over everything.
Title:  The sea was as a crucible of molten gold, that bubblingly leaps with
Title:  light and heat.
Title:  
Title:  Long maintaining an enchanted silence, Ahab stood apart; and every
Title:  time the tetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit, he
Title:  turned to eye the bright sun's rays produced ahead; and when she
Title:  profoundly settled by the stern, he turned behind, and saw the sun's
Title:  rearward place, and how the same yellow rays were blending with his
Title:  undeviating wake.
Title:  
Title:  "Ha, ha, my ship! thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot
Title:  of the sun.  Ho, ho! all ye nations before my prow, I bring the sun
Title:  to ye!  Yoke on the further billows; hallo! a tandem, I drive the
Title:  sea!"
Title:  
Title:  But suddenly reined back by some counter thought, he hurried towards
Title:  the helm, huskily demanding how the ship was heading.
Title:  
Title:  "East-sou-east, sir," said the frightened steersman.
Title:  
Title:  "Thou liest!" smiting him with his clenched fist.  "Heading East at
Title:  this hour in the morning, and the sun astern?"
Title:  
Title:  Upon this every soul was confounded; for the phenomenon just then
Title:  observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else; but its
Title:  very blinding palpableness must have been the cause.
Title:  
Title:  Thrusting his head half way into the binnacle, Ahab caught one
Title:  glimpse of the compasses; his uplifted arm slowly fell; for a moment
Title:  he almost seemed to stagger.  Standing behind him Starbuck looked,
Title:  and lo! the two compasses pointed East, and the Pequod was as
Title:  infallibly going West.
Title:  
Title:  But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew, the
Title:  old man with a rigid laugh exclaimed, "I have it!  It has happened
Title:  before.  Mr. Starbuck, last night's thunder turned our
Title:  compasses--that's all.  Thou hast before now heard of such a thing, I
Title:  take it."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye; but never before has it happened to me, sir," said the pale
Title:  mate, gloomily.
Title:  
Title:  Here, it must needs be said, that accidents like this have in more
Title:  than one case occurred to ships in violent storms.  The magnetic
Title:  energy, as developed in the mariner's needle, is, as all know,
Title:  essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven; hence it is
Title:  not to be much marvelled at, that such things should be.  Instances
Title:  where the lightning has actually struck the vessel, so as to smite
Title:  down some of the spars and rigging, the effect upon the needle has at
Title:  times been still more fatal; all its loadstone virtue being
Title:  annihilated, so that the before magnetic steel was of no more use
Title:  than an old wife's knitting needle.  But in either case, the needle
Title:  never again, of itself, recovers the original virtue thus marred or
Title:  lost; and if the binnacle compasses be affected, the same fate
Title:  reaches all the others that may be in the ship; even were the
Title:  lowermost one inserted into the kelson.
Title:  
Title:  Deliberately standing before the binnacle, and eyeing the
Title:  transpointed compasses, the old man, with the sharp of his extended
Title:  hand, now took the precise bearing of the sun, and satisfied that the
Title:  needles were exactly inverted, shouted out his orders for the ship's
Title:  course to be changed accordingly.  The yards were hard up; and once
Title:  more the Pequod thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind, for
Title:  the supposed fair one had only been juggling her.
Title:  
Title:  Meanwhile, whatever were his own secret thoughts, Starbuck said
Title:  nothing, but quietly he issued all requisite orders; while Stubb and
Title:  Flask--who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing his
Title:  feelings--likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced.  As for the men, though
Title:  some of them lowly rumbled, their fear of Ahab was greater than their
Title:  fear of Fate.  But as ever before, the pagan harpooneers remained
Title:  almost wholly unimpressed; or if impressed, it was only with a
Title:  certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible
Title:  Ahab's.
Title:  
Title:  For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries.  But
Title:  chancing to slip with his ivory heel, he saw the crushed copper
Title:  sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck.
Title:  
Title:  "Thou poor, proud heaven-gazer and sun's pilot! yesterday I wrecked
Title:  thee, and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me.  So, so.
Title:  But Ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet.  Mr. Starbuck--a lance
Title:  without a pole; a top-maul, and the smallest of the sail-maker's
Title:  needles.  Quick!"
Title:  
Title:  Accessory, perhaps, to the impulse dictating the thing he was now
Title:  about to do, were certain prudential motives, whose object might have
Title:  been to revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile
Title:  skill, in a matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses.
Title:  Besides, the old man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles,
Title:  though clumsily practicable, was not a thing to be passed over by
Title:  superstitious sailors, without some shudderings and evil portents.
Title:  
Title:  "Men," said he, steadily turning upon the crew, as the mate handed
Title:  him the things he had demanded, "my men, the thunder turned old
Title:  Ahab's needles; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his
Title:  own, that will point as true as any."
Title:  
Title:  Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors, as
Title:  this was said; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic
Title:  might follow.  But Starbuck looked away.
Title:  
Title:  With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the
Title:  lance, and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining, bade
Title:  him hold it upright, without its touching the deck.  Then, with the
Title:  maul, after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod, he
Title:  placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it, and less strongly
Title:  hammered that, several times, the mate still holding the rod as
Title:  before.  Then going through some small strange motions with
Title:  it--whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel, or merely
Title:  intended to augment the awe of the crew, is uncertain--he called for
Title:  linen thread; and moving to the binnacle, slipped out the two
Title:  reversed needles there, and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by
Title:  its middle, over one of the compass-cards.  At first, the steel went
Title:  round and round, quivering and vibrating at either end; but at last
Title:  it settled to its place, when Ahab, who had been intently watching
Title:  for this result, stepped frankly back from the binnacle, and pointing
Title:  his stretched arm towards it, exclaimed,--"Look ye, for yourselves,
Title:  if Ahab be not lord of the level loadstone!  The sun is East, and
Title:  that compass swears it!"
Title:  
Title:  One after another they peered in, for nothing but their own eyes
Title:  could persuade such ignorance as theirs, and one after another they
Title:  slunk away.
Title:  
Title:  In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph, you then saw Ahab in all his
Title:  fatal pride.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 125
Title:  
Title:  The Log and Line.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage, the
Title:  log and line had but very seldom been in use.  Owing to a confident
Title:  reliance upon other means of determining the vessel's place, some
Title:  merchantmen, and many whalemen, especially when cruising, wholly
Title:  neglect to heave the log; though at the same time, and frequently
Title:  more for form's sake than anything else, regularly putting down upon
Title:  the customary slate the course steered by the ship, as well as the
Title:  presumed average rate of progression every hour.  It had been thus
Title:  with the Pequod.  The wooden reel and angular log attached hung, long
Title:  untouched, just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks.  Rains and
Title:  spray had damped it; sun and wind had warped it; all the elements
Title:  had combined to rot a thing that hung so idly.  But heedless of all
Title:  this, his mood seized Ahab, as he happened to glance upon the reel,
Title:  not many hours after the magnet scene, and he remembered how his
Title:  quadrant was no more, and recalled his frantic oath about the level
Title:  log and line.  The ship was sailing plungingly; astern the billows
Title:  rolled in riots.
Title:  
Title:  "Forward, there!  Heave the log!"
Title:  
Title:  Two seamen came.  The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman.
Title:  "Take the reel, one of ye, I'll heave."
Title:  
Title:  They went towards the extreme stern, on the ship's lee side, where
Title:  the deck, with the oblique energy of the wind, was now almost dipping
Title:  into the creamy, sidelong-rushing sea.
Title:  
Title:  The Manxman took the reel, and holding it high up, by the projecting
Title:  handle-ends of the spindle, round which the spool of line revolved,
Title:  so stood with the angular log hanging downwards, till Ahab advanced
Title:  to him.
Title:  
Title:  Ahab stood before him, and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty
Title:  turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard, when the old
Title:  Manxman, who was intently eyeing both him and the line, made bold to
Title:  speak.
Title:  
Title:  "Sir, I mistrust it; this line looks far gone, long heat and wet have
Title:  spoiled it."
Title:  
Title:  "'Twill hold, old gentleman.  Long heat and wet, have they spoiled
Title:  thee?  Thou seem'st to hold.  Or, truer perhaps, life holds thee;
Title:  not thou it."
Title:  
Title:  "I hold the spool, sir.  But just as my captain says.  With these
Title:  grey hairs of mine 'tis not worth while disputing, 'specially with a
Title:  superior, who'll ne'er confess."
Title:  
Title:  "What's that?  There now's a patched professor in Queen Nature's
Title:  granite-founded College; but methinks he's too subservient.  Where
Title:  wert thou born?"
Title:  
Title:  "In the little rocky Isle of Man, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Excellent!  Thou'st hit the world by that."
Title:  
Title:  "I know not, sir, but I was born there."
Title:  
Title:  "In the Isle of Man, hey?  Well, the other way, it's good.  Here's a
Title:  man from Man; a man born in once independent Man, and now unmanned of
Title:  Man; which is sucked in--by what?  Up with the reel!  The dead, blind
Title:  wall butts all inquiring heads at last.  Up with it!  So."
Title:  
Title:  The log was heaved.  The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a
Title:  long dragging line astern, and then, instantly, the reel began to
Title:  whirl.  In turn, jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows,
Title:  the towing resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger
Title:  strangely.
Title:  
Title:  "Hold hard!"
Title:  
Title:  Snap! the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon; the
Title:  tugging log was gone.
Title:  
Title:  "I crush the quadrant, the thunder turns the needles, and now the mad
Title:  sea parts the log-line.  But Ahab can mend all.  Haul in here,
Title:  Tahitian; reel up, Manxman.  And look ye, let the carpenter make
Title:  another log, and mend thou the line.  See to it."
Title:  
Title:  "There he goes now; to him nothing's happened; but to me, the skewer
Title:  seems loosening out of the middle of the world.  Haul in, haul in,
Title:  Tahitian!  These lines run whole, and whirling out: come in broken,
Title:  and dragging slow.  Ha, Pip? come to help; eh, Pip?"
Title:  
Title:  "Pip? whom call ye Pip?  Pip jumped from the whale-boat.  Pip's
Title:  missing.  Let's see now if ye haven't fished him up here, fisherman.
Title:  It drags hard; I guess he's holding on.  Jerk him, Tahiti!  Jerk him
Title:  off; we haul in no cowards here.  Ho! there's his arm just breaking
Title:  water.  A hatchet! a hatchet! cut it off--we haul in no cowards here.
Title:  Captain Ahab! sir, sir! here's Pip, trying to get on board again."
Title:  
Title:  "Peace, thou crazy loon," cried the Manxman, seizing him by the arm.
Title:  "Away from the quarter-deck!"
Title:  
Title:  "The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser," muttered Ahab, advancing.
Title:  "Hands off from that holiness!  Where sayest thou Pip was, boy?
Title:  
Title:  "Astern there, sir, astern!  Lo! lo!"
Title:  
Title:  "And who art thou, boy?  I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils
Title:  of thy eyes.  Oh God! that man should be a thing for immortal souls
Title:  to sieve through!  Who art thou, boy?"
Title:  
Title:  "Bell-boy, sir; ship's-crier; ding, dong, ding!  Pip!  Pip!  Pip!  One
Title:  hundred pounds of clay reward for Pip; five feet high--looks
Title:  cowardly--quickest known by that!  Ding, dong, ding!  Who's seen Pip
Title:  the coward?"
Title:  
Title:  "There can be no hearts above the snow-line.  Oh, ye frozen heavens!
Title:  look down here.  Ye did beget this luckless child, and have abandoned
Title:  him, ye creative libertines.  Here, boy; Ahab's cabin shall be Pip's
Title:  home henceforth, while Ahab lives.  Thou touchest my inmost centre,
Title:  boy; thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings.  Come,
Title:  let's down."
Title:  
Title:  "What's this? here's velvet shark-skin," intently gazing at Ahab's
Title:  hand, and feeling it.  "Ah, now, had poor Pip but felt so kind a
Title:  thing as this, perhaps he had ne'er been lost!  This seems to me,
Title:  sir, as a man-rope; something that weak souls may hold by.  Oh, sir,
Title:  let old Perth now come and rivet these two hands together; the black
Title:  one with the white, for I will not let this go."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, boy, nor will I thee, unless I should thereby drag thee to worse
Title:  horrors than are here.  Come, then, to my cabin.  Lo! ye believers in
Title:  gods all goodness, and in man all ill, lo you! see the omniscient
Title:  gods oblivious of suffering man; and man, though idiotic, and knowing
Title:  not what he does, yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude.
Title:  Come!  I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand, than though I
Title:  grasped an Emperor's!"
Title:  
Title:  "There go two daft ones now," muttered the old Manxman.  "One daft
Title:  with strength, the other daft with weakness.  But here's the end of
Title:  the rotten line--all dripping, too.  Mend it, eh?  I think we had
Title:  best have a new line altogether.  I'll see Mr. Stubb about it."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 126
Title:  
Title:  The Life-Buoy.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Steering now south-eastward by Ahab's levelled steel, and her
Title:  progress solely determined by Ahab's level log and line; the Pequod
Title:  held on her path towards the Equator.  Making so long a passage
Title:  through such unfrequented waters, descrying no ships, and ere long,
Title:  sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds, over waves monotonously
Title:  mild; all these seemed the strange calm things preluding some riotous
Title:  and desperate scene.
Title:  
Title:  At last, when the ship drew near to the outskirts, as it were, of the
Title:  Equatorial fishing-ground, and in the deep darkness that goes before
Title:  the dawn, was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets; the watch--then
Title:  headed by Flask--was startled by a cry so plaintively wild and
Title:  unearthly--like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of all
Title:  Herod's murdered Innocents--that one and all, they started from their
Title:  reveries, and for the space of some moments stood, or sat, or leaned
Title:  all transfixedly listening, like the carved Roman slave, while that
Title:  wild cry remained within hearing.  The Christian or civilized part of
Title:  the crew said it was mermaids, and shuddered; but the pagan
Title:  harpooneers remained unappalled.  Yet the grey Manxman--the oldest
Title:  mariner of all--declared that the wild thrilling sounds that were
Title:  heard, were the voices of newly drowned men in the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Below in his hammock, Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn, when
Title:  he came to the deck; it was then recounted to him by Flask, not
Title:  unaccompanied with hinted dark meanings.  He hollowly laughed, and
Title:  thus explained the wonder.
Title:  
Title:  Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great
Title:  numbers of seals, and some young seals that had lost their dams, or
Title:  some dams that had lost their cubs, must have risen nigh the ship and
Title:  kept company with her, crying and sobbing with their human sort of
Title:  wail.  But this only the more affected some of them, because most
Title:  mariners cherish a very superstitious feeling about seals, arising
Title:  not only from their peculiar tones when in distress, but also from
Title:  the human look of their round heads and semi-intelligent faces, seen
Title:  peeringly uprising from the water alongside.  In the sea, under
Title:  certain circumstances, seals have more than once been mistaken for
Title:  men.
Title:  
Title:  But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible
Title:  confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning.  At
Title:  sun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore;
Title:  and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep (for
Title:  sailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state), whether it was
Title:  thus with the man, there is now no telling; but, be that as it may,
Title:  he had not been long at his perch, when a cry was heard--a cry and a
Title:  rushing--and looking up, they saw a falling phantom in the air; and
Title:  looking down, a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue of
Title:  the sea.
Title:  
Title:  The life-buoy--a long slender cask--was dropped from the stern, where
Title:  it always hung obedient to a cunning spring; but no hand rose to
Title:  seize it, and the sun having long beat upon this cask it had
Title:  shrunken, so that it slowly filled, and that parched wood also
Title:  filled at its every pore; and the studded iron-bound cask followed
Title:  the sailor to the bottom, as if to yield him his pillow, though in
Title:  sooth but a hard one.
Title:  
Title:  And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look
Title:  out for the White Whale, on the White Whale's own peculiar ground;
Title:  that man was swallowed up in the deep.  But few, perhaps, thought of
Title:  that at the time.  Indeed, in some sort, they were not grieved at
Title:  this event, at least as a portent; for they regarded it, not as a
Title:  foreshadowing of evil in the future, but as the fulfilment of an
Title:  evil already presaged.  They declared that now they knew the reason
Title:  of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before.  But again the
Title:  old Manxman said nay.
Title:  
Title:  The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced; Starbuck was directed to
Title:  see to it; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found, and
Title:  as in the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of
Title:  the voyage, all hands were impatient of any toil but what was
Title:  directly connected with its final end, whatever that might prove to
Title:  be; therefore, they were going to leave the ship's stern unprovided
Title:  with a buoy, when by certain strange signs and inuendoes Queequeg
Title:  hinted a hint concerning his coffin.
Title:  
Title:  "A life-buoy of a coffin!" cried Starbuck, starting.
Title:  
Title:  "Rather queer, that, I should say," said Stubb.
Title:  
Title:  "It will make a good enough one," said Flask, "the carpenter here can
Title:  arrange it easily."
Title:  
Title:  "Bring it up; there's nothing else for it," said Starbuck, after a
Title:  melancholy pause.  "Rig it, carpenter; do not look at me so--the
Title:  coffin, I mean.  Dost thou hear me?  Rig it."
Title:  
Title:  "And shall I nail down the lid, sir?" moving his hand as with a
Title:  hammer.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye."
Title:  
Title:  "And shall I caulk the seams, sir?" moving his hand as with a
Title:  caulking-iron.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye."
Title:  
Title:  "And shall I then pay over the same with pitch, sir?" moving his hand
Title:  as with a pitch-pot.
Title:  
Title:  "Away! what possesses thee to this?  Make a life-buoy of the coffin,
Title:  and no more.--Mr. Stubb, Mr. Flask, come forward with me."
Title:  
Title:  "He goes off in a huff.  The whole he can endure; at the parts he
Title:  baulks.  Now I don't like this.  I make a leg for Captain Ahab, and
Title:  he wears it like a gentleman; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg, and
Title:  he won't put his head into it.  Are all my pains to go for nothing
Title:  with that coffin?  And now I'm ordered to make a life-buoy of it.
Title:  It's like turning an old coat; going to bring the flesh on the other
Title:  side now.  I don't like this cobbling sort of business--I don't like
Title:  it at all; it's undignified; it's not my place.  Let tinkers' brats
Title:  do tinkerings; we are their betters.  I like to take in hand none but
Title:  clean, virgin, fair-and-square mathematical jobs, something that
Title:  regularly begins at the beginning, and is at the middle when midway,
Title:  and comes to an end at the conclusion; not a cobbler's job, that's at
Title:  an end in the middle, and at the beginning at the end.  It's the old
Title:  woman's tricks to be giving cobbling jobs.  Lord! what an affection
Title:  all old women have for tinkers.  I know an old woman of sixty-five
Title:  who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once.  And that's the
Title:  reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore, when I
Title:  kept my job-shop in the Vineyard; they might have taken it into their
Title:  lonely old heads to run off with me.  But heigh-ho! there are no caps
Title:  at sea but snow-caps.  Let me see.  Nail down the lid; caulk the
Title:  seams; pay over the same with pitch; batten them down tight, and hang
Title:  it with the snap-spring over the ship's stern.  Were ever such things
Title:  done before with a coffin?  Some superstitious old carpenters, now,
Title:  would be tied up in the rigging, ere they would do the job.  But I'm
Title:  made of knotty Aroostook hemlock; I don't budge.  Cruppered with a
Title:  coffin!  Sailing about with a grave-yard tray!  But never mind.  We
Title:  workers in woods make bridal-bedsteads and card-tables, as well as
Title:  coffins and hearses.  We work by the month, or by the job, or by the
Title:  profit; not for us to ask the why and wherefore of our work, unless
Title:  it be too confounded cobbling, and then we stash it if we can.  Hem!
Title:  I'll do the job, now, tenderly.  I'll have me--let's see--how many in
Title:  the ship's company, all told?  But I've forgotten.  Any way, I'll
Title:  have me thirty separate, Turk's-headed life-lines, each three feet
Title:  long hanging all round to the coffin.  Then, if the hull go down,
Title:  there'll be thirty lively fellows all fighting for one coffin, a
Title:  sight not seen very often beneath the sun!  Come hammer,
Title:  caulking-iron, pitch-pot, and marling-spike!  Let's to it."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 127
Title:  
Title:  The Deck.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  THE COFFIN LAID UPON TWO LINE-TUBS, BETWEEN THE VICE-BENCH AND THE
Title:  OPEN HATCHWAY; THE CARPENTER CAULKING ITS SEAMS; THE STRING OF
Title:  TWISTED OAKUM SLOWLY UNWINDING FROM A LARGE ROLL OF IT PLACED IN THE
Title:  BOSOM OF HIS FROCK.--AHAB COMES SLOWLY FROM THE CABIN-GANGWAY, AND
Title:  HEARS PIP FOLLOWING HIM.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Back, lad; I will be with ye again presently.  He goes!  Not this
Title:  hand complies with my humor more genially than that boy.--Middle
Title:  aisle of a church!  What's here?"
Title:  
Title:  "Life-buoy, sir.  Mr. Starbuck's orders.  Oh, look, sir!  Beware the
Title:  hatchway!"
Title:  
Title:  "Thank ye, man.  Thy coffin lies handy to the vault."
Title:  
Title:  "Sir?  The hatchway? oh!  So it does, sir, so it does."
Title:  
Title:  "Art not thou the leg-maker?  Look, did not this stump come from thy
Title:  shop?"
Title:  
Title:  "I believe it did, sir; does the ferrule stand, sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "Well enough.  But art thou not also the undertaker?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, sir; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg; but
Title:  they've set me now to turning it into something else."
Title:  
Title:  "Then tell me; art thou not an arrant, all-grasping, intermeddling,
Title:  monopolising, heathenish old scamp, to be one day making legs, and
Title:  the next day coffins to clap them in, and yet again life-buoys out of
Title:  those same coffins?  Thou art as unprincipled as the gods, and as
Title:  much of a jack-of-all-trades."
Title:  
Title:  "But I do not mean anything, sir.  I do as I do."
Title:  
Title:  "The gods again.  Hark ye, dost thou not ever sing working about a
Title:  coffin?  The Titans, they say, hummed snatches when chipping out the
Title:  craters for volcanoes; and the grave-digger in the play sings, spade
Title:  in hand.  Dost thou never?"
Title:  
Title:  "Sing, sir?  Do I sing?  Oh, I'm indifferent enough, sir, for that;
Title:  but the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because
Title:  there was none in his spade, sir.  But the caulking mallet is full of
Title:  it.  Hark to it."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, and that's because the lid there's a sounding-board; and what
Title:  in all things makes the sounding-board is this--there's naught
Title:  beneath.  And yet, a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the
Title:  same, Carpenter.  Hast thou ever helped carry a bier, and heard the
Title:  coffin knock against the churchyard gate, going in?
Title:  
Title:  "Faith, sir, I've--"
Title:  
Title:  "Faith?  What's that?"
Title:  
Title:  "Why, faith, sir, it's only a sort of exclamation-like--that's all,
Title:  sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Um, um; go on."
Title:  
Title:  "I was about to say, sir, that--"
Title:  
Title:  "Art thou a silk-worm?  Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself?
Title:  Look at thy bosom!  Despatch! and get these traps out of sight."
Title:  
Title:  "He goes aft.  That was sudden, now; but squalls come sudden in hot
Title:  latitudes.  I've heard that the Isle of Albemarle, one of the
Title:  Gallipagos, is cut by the Equator right in the middle.  Seems to me
Title:  some sort of Equator cuts yon old man, too, right in his middle.
Title:  He's always under the Line--fiery hot, I tell ye!  He's looking this
Title:  way--come, oakum; quick.  Here we go again.  This wooden mallet is
Title:  the cork, and I'm the professor of musical glasses--tap, tap!"
Title:  
Title:  (AHAB TO HIMSELF.)
Title:  
Title:  "There's a sight!  There's a sound!  The grey-headed woodpecker
Title:  tapping the hollow tree!  Blind and dumb might well be envied now.
Title:  See! that thing rests on two line-tubs, full of tow-lines.  A most
Title:  malicious wag, that fellow.  Rat-tat!  So man's seconds tick!  Oh!
Title:  how immaterial are all materials!  What things real are there, but
Title:  imponderable thoughts?  Here now's the very dreaded symbol of grim
Title:  death, by a mere hap, made the expressive sign of the help and hope
Title:  of most endangered life.  A life-buoy of a coffin!  Does it go
Title:  further?  Can it be that in some spiritual sense the coffin is, after
Title:  all, but an immortality-preserver!  I'll think of that.  But no.  So
Title:  far gone am I in the dark side of earth, that its other side, the
Title:  theoretic bright one, seems but uncertain twilight to me.  Will ye
Title:  never have done, Carpenter, with that accursed sound?  I go below;
Title:  let me not see that thing here when I return again.  Now, then, Pip,
Title:  we'll talk this over; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee!
Title:  Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 128
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod Meets The Rachel.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Next day, a large ship, the Rachel, was descried, bearing directly
Title:  down upon the Pequod, all her spars thickly clustering with men.  At
Title:  the time the Pequod was making good speed through the water; but as
Title:  the broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her, the boastful
Title:  sails all fell together as blank bladders that are burst, and all
Title:  life fled from the smitten hull.
Title:  
Title:  "Bad news; she brings bad news," muttered the old Manxman.  But ere
Title:  her commander, who, with trumpet to mouth, stood up in his boat; ere
Title:  he could hopefully hail, Ahab's voice was heard.
Title:  
Title:  "Hast seen the White Whale?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, yesterday.  Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift?"
Title:  
Title:  Throttling his joy, Ahab negatively answered this unexpected
Title:  question; and would then have fain boarded the stranger, when the
Title:  stranger captain himself, having stopped his vessel's way, was seen
Title:  descending her side.  A few keen pulls, and his boat-hook soon
Title:  clinched the Pequod's main-chains, and he sprang to the deck.
Title:  Immediately he was recognised by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew.  But
Title:  no formal salutation was exchanged.
Title:  
Title:  "Where was he?--not killed!--not killed!" cried Ahab, closely
Title:  advancing.  "How was it?"
Title:  
Title:  It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous,
Title:  while three of the stranger's boats were engaged with a shoal of
Title:  whales, which had led them some four or five miles from the ship; and
Title:  while they were yet in swift chase to windward, the white hump and
Title:  head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the water, not very
Title:  far to leeward; whereupon, the fourth rigged boat--a reserved
Title:  one--had been instantly lowered in chase.  After a keen sail before
Title:  the wind, this fourth boat--the swiftest keeled of all--seemed to
Title:  have succeeded in fastening--at least, as well as the man at the
Title:  mast-head could tell anything about it.  In the distance he saw the
Title:  diminished dotted boat; and then a swift gleam of bubbling white
Title:  water; and after that nothing more; whence it was concluded that the
Title:  stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his pursuers, as
Title:  often happens.  There was some apprehension, but no positive alarm,
Title:  as yet.  The recall signals were placed in the rigging; darkness came
Title:  on; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats--ere going
Title:  in quest of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction--the
Title:  ship had not only been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate
Title:  till near midnight, but, for the time, to increase her distance from
Title:  it.  But the rest of her crew being at last safe aboard, she crowded
Title:  all sail--stunsail on stunsail--after the missing boat; kindling a
Title:  fire in her try-pots for a beacon; and every other man aloft on the
Title:  look-out.  But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance
Title:  to gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen; though
Title:  she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her; and
Title:  not finding anything, had again dashed on; again paused, and lowered
Title:  her boats; and though she had thus continued doing till daylight;
Title:  yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been seen.
Title:  
Title:  The story told, the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal
Title:  his object in boarding the Pequod.  He desired that ship to unite
Title:  with his own in the search; by sailing over the sea some four or five
Title:  miles apart, on parallel lines, and so sweeping a double horizon, as
Title:  it were.
Title:  
Title:  "I will wager something now," whispered Stubb to Flask, "that some
Title:  one in that missing boat wore off that Captain's best coat; mayhap,
Title:  his watch--he's so cursed anxious to get it back.  Who ever heard of
Title:  two pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in the
Title:  height of the whaling season?  See, Flask, only see how pale he
Title:  looks--pale in the very buttons of his eyes--look--it wasn't the
Title:  coat--it must have been the--"
Title:  
Title:  "My boy, my own boy is among them.  For God's sake--I beg, I
Title:  conjure"--here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab, who thus far
Title:  had but icily received his petition.  "For eight-and-forty hours let
Title:  me charter your ship--I will gladly pay for it, and roundly pay for
Title:  it--if there be no other way--for eight-and-forty hours only--only
Title:  that--you must, oh, you must, and you SHALL do this thing."
Title:  
Title:  "His son!" cried Stubb, "oh, it's his son he's lost!  I take back the
Title:  coat and watch--what says Ahab?  We must save that boy."
Title:  
Title:  "He's drowned with the rest on 'em, last night," said the old Manx
Title:  sailor standing behind them; "I heard; all of ye heard their
Title:  spirits."
Title:  
Title:  Now, as it shortly turned out, what made this incident of the
Title:  Rachel's the more melancholy, was the circumstance, that not only was
Title:  one of the Captain's sons among the number of the missing boat's
Title:  crew; but among the number of the other boat's crews, at the same
Title:  time, but on the other hand, separated from the ship during the dark
Title:  vicissitudes of the chase, there had been still another son; as that
Title:  for a time, the wretched father was plunged to the bottom of the
Title:  cruellest perplexity; which was only solved for him by his chief
Title:  mate's instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whale-ship
Title:  in such emergencies, that is, when placed between jeopardized but
Title:  divided boats, always to pick up the majority first.  But the
Title:  captain, for some unknown constitutional reason, had refrained from
Title:  mentioning all this, and not till forced to it by Ahab's iciness did
Title:  he allude to his one yet missing boy; a little lad, but twelve years
Title:  old, whose father with the earnest but unmisgiving hardihood of a
Title:  Nantucketer's paternal love, had thus early sought to initiate him in
Title:  the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially the destiny
Title:  of all his race.  Nor does it unfrequently occur, that Nantucket
Title:  captains will send a son of such tender age away from them, for a
Title:  protracted three or four years' voyage in some other ship than their
Title:  own; so that their first knowledge of a whaleman's career shall be
Title:  unenervated by any chance display of a father's natural but untimely
Title:  partiality, or undue apprehensiveness and concern.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of
Title:  Ahab; and Ahab still stood like an anvil, receiving every shock, but
Title:  without the least quivering of his own.
Title:  
Title:  "I will not go," said the stranger, "till you say aye to me.  Do to
Title:  me as you would have me do to you in the like case.  For YOU too have
Title:  a boy, Captain Ahab--though but a child, and nestling safely at home
Title:  now--a child of your old age too--Yes, yes, you relent; I see
Title:  it--run, run, men, now, and stand by to square in the yards."
Title:  
Title:  "Avast," cried Ahab--"touch not a rope-yarn"; then in a voice that
Title:  prolongingly moulded every word--"Captain Gardiner, I will not do it.
Title:  Even now I lose time.  Good-bye, good-bye.  God bless ye, man, and
Title:  may I forgive myself, but I must go.  Mr. Starbuck, look at the
Title:  binnacle watch, and in three minutes from this present instant warn
Title:  off all strangers: then brace forward again, and let the ship sail
Title:  as before."
Title:  
Title:  Hurriedly turning, with averted face, he descended into his cabin,
Title:  leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and
Title:  utter rejection of his so earnest suit.  But starting from his
Title:  enchantment, Gardiner silently hurried to the side; more fell than
Title:  stepped into his boat, and returned to his ship.
Title:  
Title:  Soon the two ships diverged their wakes; and long as the strange
Title:  vessel was in view, she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every
Title:  dark spot, however small, on the sea.  This way and that her yards
Title:  were swung round; starboard and larboard, she continued to tack;
Title:  now she beat against a head sea; and again it pushed her before it;
Title:  while all the while, her masts and yards were thickly clustered with
Title:  men, as three tall cherry trees, when the boys are cherrying among
Title:  the boughs.
Title:  
Title:  But by her still halting course and winding, woeful way, you plainly
Title:  saw that this ship that so wept with spray, still remained without
Title:  comfort.  She was Rachel, weeping for her children, because they were
Title:  not.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 129
Title:  
Title:  The Cabin.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  (AHAB MOVING TO GO ON DECK; PIP CATCHES HIM BY THE HAND TO FOLLOW.)
Title:  
Title:  Lad, lad, I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now.  The hour is
Title:  coming when Ahab would not scare thee from him, yet would not have
Title:  thee by him.  There is that in thee, poor lad, which I feel too
Title:  curing to my malady.  Like cures like; and for this hunt, my malady
Title:  becomes my most desired health.  Do thou abide below here, where they
Title:  shall serve thee, as if thou wert the captain.  Aye, lad, thou shalt
Title:  sit here in my own screwed chair; another screw to it, thou must be."
Title:  
Title:  "No, no, no! ye have not a whole body, sir; do ye but use poor me for
Title:  your one lost leg; only tread upon me, sir; I ask no more, so I
Title:  remain a part of ye."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh! spite of million villains, this makes me a bigot in the fadeless
Title:  fidelity of man!--and a black! and crazy!--but methinks
Title:  like-cures-like applies to him too; he grows so sane again."
Title:  
Title:  "They tell me, sir, that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip, whose
Title:  drowned bones now show white, for all the blackness of his living
Title:  skin.  But I will never desert ye, sir, as Stubb did him.  Sir, I
Title:  must go with ye."
Title:  
Title:  "If thou speakest thus to me much more, Ahab's purpose keels up in
Title:  him.  I tell thee no; it cannot be."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh good master, master, master!
Title:  
Title:  "Weep so, and I will murder thee! have a care, for Ahab too is mad.
Title:  Listen, and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck, and
Title:  still know that I am there.  And now I quit thee.  Thy hand!--Met!
Title:  True art thou, lad, as the circumference to its centre.  So: God for
Title:  ever bless thee; and if it come to that,--God for ever save thee, let
Title:  what will befall."
Title:  
Title:  (AHAB GOES; PIP STEPS ONE STEP FORWARD.)
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  "Here he this instant stood; I stand in his air,--but I'm alone.
Title:  Now were even poor Pip here I could endure it, but he's missing.
Title:  Pip!  Pip!  Ding, dong, ding!  Who's seen Pip?  He must be up here;
Title:  let's try the door.  What? neither lock, nor bolt, nor bar; and yet
Title:  there's no opening it.  It must be the spell; he told me to stay
Title:  here: Aye, and told me this screwed chair was mine.  Here, then, I'll
Title:  seat me, against the transom, in the ship's full middle, all her keel
Title:  and her three masts before me.  Here, our old sailors say, in their
Title:  black seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table, and lord
Title:  it over rows of captains and lieutenants.  Ha! what's this? epaulets!
Title:  epaulets! the epaulets all come crowding!  Pass round the decanters;
Title:  glad to see ye; fill up, monsieurs!  What an odd feeling, now, when a
Title:  black boy's host to white men with gold lace upon their
Title:  coats!--Monsieurs, have ye seen one Pip?--a little negro lad, five
Title:  feet high, hang-dog look, and cowardly!  Jumped from a whale-boat
Title:  once;--seen him?  No!  Well then, fill up again, captains, and let's
Title:  drink shame upon all cowards!  I name no names.  Shame upon them!
Title:  Put one foot upon the table.  Shame upon all cowards.--Hist! above
Title:  there, I hear ivory--Oh, master! master!  I am indeed down-hearted
Title:  when you walk over me.  But here I'll stay, though this stern
Title:  strikes rocks; and they bulge through; and oysters come to join me."
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 130
Title:  
Title:  The Hat.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  And now that at the proper time and place, after so long and wide a
Title:  preliminary cruise, Ahab,--all other whaling waters swept--seemed to
Title:  have chased his foe into an ocean-fold, to slay him the more securely
Title:  there; now, that he found himself hard by the very latitude and
Title:  longitude where his tormenting wound had been inflicted; now that a
Title:  vessel had been spoken which on the very day preceding had actually
Title:  encountered Moby Dick;--and now that all his successive meetings with
Title:  various ships contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac
Title:  indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters, whether
Title:  sinning or sinned against; now it was that there lurked a something
Title:  in the old man's eyes, which it was hardly sufferable for feeble
Title:  souls to see.  As the unsetting polar star, which through the
Title:  livelong, arctic, six months' night sustains its piercing, steady,
Title:  central gaze; so Ahab's purpose now fixedly gleamed down upon the
Title:  constant midnight of the gloomy crew.  It domineered above them so,
Title:  that all their bodings, doubts, misgivings, fears, were fain to hide
Title:  beneath their souls, and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf.
Title:  
Title:  In this foreshadowing interval too, all humor, forced or natural,
Title:  vanished.  Stubb no more strove to raise a smile; Starbuck no more
Title:  strove to check one.  Alike, joy and sorrow, hope and fear, seemed
Title:  ground to finest dust, and powdered, for the time, in the clamped
Title:  mortar of Ahab's iron soul.  Like machines, they dumbly moved about
Title:  the deck, ever conscious that the old man's despot eye was on them.
Title:  
Title:  But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours;
Title:  when he thought no glance but one was on him; then you would have
Title:  seen that even as Ahab's eyes so awed the crew's, the inscrutable
Title:  Parsee's glance awed his; or somehow, at least, in some wild way, at
Title:  times affected it.  Such an added, gliding strangeness began to
Title:  invest the thin Fedallah now; such ceaseless shudderings shook him;
Title:  that the men looked dubious at him; half uncertain, as it seemed,
Title:  whether indeed he were a mortal substance, or else a tremulous shadow
Title:  cast upon the deck by some unseen being's body.  And that shadow was
Title:  always hovering there.  For not by night, even, had Fedallah ever
Title:  certainly been known to slumber, or go below.  He would stand still
Title:  for hours: but never sat or leaned; his wan but wondrous eyes did
Title:  plainly say--We two watchmen never rest.
Title:  
Title:  Nor, at any time, by night or day could the mariners now step upon
Title:  the deck, unless Ahab was before them; either standing in his
Title:  pivot-hole, or exactly pacing the planks between two undeviating
Title:  limits,--the main-mast and the mizen; or else they saw him standing
Title:  in the cabin-scuttle,--his living foot advanced upon the deck, as if
Title:  to step; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes; so that however
Title:  motionless he stood, however the days and nights were added on, that
Title:  he had not swung in his hammock; yet hidden beneath that slouching
Title:  hat, they could never tell unerringly whether, for all this, his eyes
Title:  were really closed at times; or whether he was still intently
Title:  scanning them; no matter, though he stood so in the scuttle for a
Title:  whole hour on the stretch, and the unheeded night-damp gathered in
Title:  beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat.  The clothes that
Title:  the night had wet, the next day's sunshine dried upon him; and so,
Title:  day after day, and night after night; he went no more beneath the
Title:  planks; whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for.
Title:  
Title:  He ate in the same open air; that is, his two only meals,--breakfast
Title:  and dinner: supper he never touched; nor reaped his beard; which
Title:  darkly grew all gnarled, as unearthed roots of trees blown over,
Title:  which still grow idly on at naked base, though perished in the upper
Title:  verdure.  But though his whole life was now become one watch on deck;
Title:  and though the Parsee's mystic watch was without intermission as his
Title:  own; yet these two never seemed to speak--one man to the
Title:  other--unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made
Title:  it necessary.  Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the
Title:  twain; openly, and to the awe-struck crew, they seemed pole-like
Title:  asunder.  If by day they chanced to speak one word; by night, dumb
Title:  men were both, so far as concerned the slightest verbal interchange.
Title:  At times, for longest hours, without a single hail, they stood far
Title:  parted in the starlight; Ahab in his scuttle, the Parsee by the
Title:  mainmast; but still fixedly gazing upon each other; as if in the
Title:  Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow, in Ahab the Parsee his
Title:  abandoned substance.
Title:  
Title:  And yet, somehow, did Ahab--in his own proper self, as daily, hourly,
Title:  and every instant, commandingly revealed to his subordinates,--Ahab
Title:  seemed an independent lord; the Parsee but his slave.  Still again
Title:  both seemed yoked together, and an unseen tyrant driving them; the
Title:  lean shade siding the solid rib.  For be this Parsee what he may, all
Title:  rib and keel was solid Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn, his iron voice was
Title:  heard from aft,--"Man the mast-heads!"--and all through the day,
Title:  till after sunset and after twilight, the same voice every hour, at
Title:  the striking of the helmsman's bell, was heard--"What d'ye
Title:  see?--sharp! sharp!"
Title:  
Title:  But when three or four days had slided by, after meeting the
Title:  children-seeking Rachel; and no spout had yet been seen; the
Title:  monomaniac old man seemed distrustful of his crew's fidelity; at
Title:  least, of nearly all except the Pagan harpooneers; he seemed to
Title:  doubt, even, whether Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook the
Title:  sight he sought.  But if these suspicions were really his, he
Title:  sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them, however his
Title:  actions might seem to hint them.
Title:  
Title:  "I will have the first sight of the whale myself,"--he said.  "Aye!
Title:  Ahab must have the doubloon! and with his own hands he rigged a nest
Title:  of basketed bowlines; and sending a hand aloft, with a single sheaved
Title:  block, to secure to the main-mast head, he received the two ends of
Title:  the downward-reeved rope; and attaching one to his basket prepared a
Title:  pin for the other end, in order to fasten it at the rail.  This done,
Title:  with that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin, he looked
Title:  round upon his crew, sweeping from one to the other; pausing his
Title:  glance long upon Daggoo, Queequeg, Tashtego; but shunning Fedallah;
Title:  and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate,
Title:  said,--"Take the rope, sir--I give it into thy hands, Starbuck."
Title:  Then arranging his person in the basket, he gave the word for them to
Title:  hoist him to his perch, Starbuck being the one who secured the rope
Title:  at last; and afterwards stood near it.  And thus, with one hand
Title:  clinging round the royal mast, Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for
Title:  miles and miles,--ahead, astern, this side, and that,--within the
Title:  wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height.
Title:  
Title:  When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in
Title:  the rigging, which chances to afford no foothold, the sailor at sea
Title:  is hoisted up to that spot, and sustained there by the rope; under
Title:  these circumstances, its fastened end on deck is always given in
Title:  strict charge to some one man who has the special watch of it.
Title:  Because in such a wilderness of running rigging, whose various
Title:  different relations aloft cannot always be infallibly discerned by
Title:  what is seen of them at the deck; and when the deck-ends of these
Title:  ropes are being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings, it
Title:  would be but a natural fatality, if, unprovided with a constant
Title:  watchman, the hoisted sailor should by some carelessness of the crew
Title:  be cast adrift and fall all swooping to the sea.  So Ahab's
Title:  proceedings in this matter were not unusual; the only strange thing
Title:  about them seemed to be, that Starbuck, almost the one only man who
Title:  had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree
Title:  approaching to decision--one of those too, whose faithfulness on the
Title:  look-out he had seemed to doubt somewhat;--it was strange, that this
Title:  was the very man he should select for his watchman; freely giving his
Title:  whole life into such an otherwise distrusted person's hands.
Title:  
Title:  Now, the first time Ahab was perched aloft; ere he had been there ten
Title:  minutes; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly
Title:  incommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these
Title:  latitudes; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round his
Title:  head in a maze of untrackably swift circlings.  Then it darted a
Title:  thousand feet straight up into the air; then spiralized downwards,
Title:  and went eddying again round his head.
Title:  
Title:  But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon, Ahab seemed
Title:  not to mark this wild bird; nor, indeed, would any one else have
Title:  marked it much, it being no uncommon circumstance; only now almost
Title:  the least heedful eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning in
Title:  almost every sight.
Title:  
Title:  "Your hat, your hat, sir!" suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman, who
Title:  being posted at the mizen-mast-head, stood directly behind Ahab,
Title:  though somewhat lower than his level, and with a deep gulf of air
Title:  dividing them.
Title:  
Title:  But already the sable wing was before the old man's eyes; the long
Title:  hooked bill at his head: with a scream, the black hawk darted away
Title:  with his prize.
Title:  
Title:  An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin's head, removing his cap to
Title:  replace it, and thereupon Tanaquil, his wife, declared that Tarquin
Title:  would be king of Rome.  But only by the replacing of the cap was that
Title:  omen accounted good.  Ahab's hat was never restored; the wild hawk
Title:  flew on and on with it; far in advance of the prow: and at last
Title:  disappeared; while from the point of that disappearance, a minute
Title:  black spot was dimly discerned, falling from that vast height into
Title:  the sea.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 131
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod Meets The Delight.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The intense Pequod sailed on; the rolling waves and days went by; the
Title:  life-buoy-coffin still lightly swung; and another ship, most
Title:  miserably misnamed the Delight, was descried.  As she drew nigh, all
Title:  eyes were fixed upon her broad beams, called shears, which, in some
Title:  whaling-ships, cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or nine
Title:  feet; serving to carry the spare, unrigged, or disabled boats.
Title:  
Title:  Upon the stranger's shears were beheld the shattered, white ribs, and
Title:  some few splintered planks, of what had once been a whale-boat; but
Title:  you now saw through this wreck, as plainly as you see through the
Title:  peeled, half-unhinged, and bleaching skeleton of a horse.
Title:  
Title:  "Hast seen the White Whale?"
Title:  
Title:  "Look!" replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail; and
Title:  with his trumpet he pointed to the wreck.
Title:  
Title:  "Hast killed him?"
Title:  
Title:  "The harpoon is not yet forged that ever will do that," answered the
Title:  other, sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on the deck, whose
Title:  gathered sides some noiseless sailors were busy in sewing together.
Title:  
Title:  "Not forged!" and snatching Perth's levelled iron from the crotch,
Title:  Ahab held it out, exclaiming--"Look ye, Nantucketer; here in this
Title:  hand I hold his death!  Tempered in blood, and tempered by lightning
Title:  are these barbs; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot place
Title:  behind the fin, where the White Whale most feels his accursed life!"
Title:  
Title:  "Then God keep thee, old man--see'st thou that"--pointing to the
Title:  hammock--"I bury but one of five stout men, who were alive only
Title:  yesterday; but were dead ere night.  Only THAT one I bury; the rest
Title:  were buried before they died; you sail upon their tomb."  Then
Title:  turning to his crew--"Are ye ready there? place the plank then on the
Title:  rail, and lift the body; so, then--Oh!  God"--advancing towards the
Title:  hammock with uplifted hands--"may the resurrection and the life--"
Title:  
Title:  "Brace forward!  Up helm!" cried Ahab like lightning to his men.
Title:  
Title:  But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape the
Title:  sound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea;
Title:  not so quick, indeed, but that some of the flying bubbles might have
Title:  sprinkled her hull with their ghostly baptism.
Title:  
Title:  As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight, the strange life-buoy
Title:  hanging at the Pequod's stern came into conspicuous relief.
Title:  
Title:  "Ha! yonder! look yonder, men!" cried a foreboding voice in her wake.
Title:  "In vain, oh, ye strangers, ye fly our sad burial; ye but turn us
Title:  your taffrail to show us your coffin!"
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 132
Title:  
Title:  The Symphony.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  It was a clear steel-blue day.  The firmaments of air and sea were
Title:  hardly separable in that all-pervading azure; only, the pensive air
Title:  was transparently pure and soft, with a woman's look, and the robust
Title:  and man-like sea heaved with long, strong, lingering swells, as
Title:  Samson's chest in his sleep.
Title:  
Title:  Hither, and thither, on high, glided the snow-white wings of small,
Title:  unspeckled birds; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air;
Title:  but to and fro in the deeps, far down in the bottomless blue, rushed
Title:  mighty leviathans, sword-fish, and sharks; and these were the strong,
Title:  troubled, murderous thinkings of the masculine sea.
Title:  
Title:  But though thus contrasting within, the contrast was only in shades
Title:  and shadows without; those two seemed one; it was only the sex, as it
Title:  were, that distinguished them.
Title:  
Title:  Aloft, like a royal czar and king, the sun seemed giving this gentle
Title:  air to this bold and rolling sea; even as bride to groom.  And at the
Title:  girdling line of the horizon, a soft and tremulous motion--most seen
Title:  here at the Equator--denoted the fond, throbbing trust, the loving
Title:  alarms, with which the poor bride gave her bosom away.
Title:  
Title:  Tied up and twisted; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles; haggardly
Title:  firm and unyielding; his eyes glowing like coals, that still glow in
Title:  the ashes of ruin; untottering Ahab stood forth in the clearness of
Title:  the morn; lifting his splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl's
Title:  forehead of heaven.
Title:  
Title:  Oh, immortal infancy, and innocency of the azure!  Invisible winged
Title:  creatures that frolic all round us!  Sweet childhood of air and sky!
Title:  how oblivious were ye of old Ahab's close-coiled woe!  But so have I
Title:  seen little Miriam and Martha, laughing-eyed elves, heedlessly gambol
Title:  around their old sire; sporting with the circle of singed locks which
Title:  grew on the marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain.
Title:  
Title:  Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle, Ahab leaned over the side
Title:  and watched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze,
Title:  the more and the more that he strove to pierce the profundity.  But
Title:  the lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel,
Title:  for a moment, the cankerous thing in his soul.  That glad, happy air,
Title:  that winsome sky, did at last stroke and caress him; the step-mother
Title:  world, so long cruel--forbidding--now threw affectionate arms round
Title:  his stubborn neck, and did seem to joyously sob over him, as if over
Title:  one, that however wilful and erring, she could yet find it in her
Title:  heart to save and to bless.  From beneath his slouched hat Ahab
Title:  dropped a tear into the sea; nor did all the Pacific contain such
Title:  wealth as that one wee drop.
Title:  
Title:  Starbuck saw the old man; saw him, how he heavily leaned over the
Title:  side; and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless
Title:  sobbing that stole out of the centre of the serenity around.  Careful
Title:  not to touch him, or be noticed by him, he yet drew near to him, and
Title:  stood there.
Title:  
Title:  Ahab turned.
Title:  
Title:  "Starbuck!"
Title:  
Title:  "Sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, Starbuck! it is a mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky.  On
Title:  such a day--very much such a sweetness as this--I struck my first
Title:  whale--a boy-harpooneer of eighteen!  Forty--forty--forty years
Title:  ago!--ago!  Forty years of continual whaling! forty years of
Title:  privation, and peril, and storm-time! forty years on the pitiless
Title:  sea! for forty years has Ahab forsaken the peaceful land, for forty
Title:  years to make war on the horrors of the deep!  Aye and yes, Starbuck,
Title:  out of those forty years I have not spent three ashore.  When I think
Title:  of this life I have led; the desolation of solitude it has been; the
Title:  masoned, walled-town of a Captain's exclusiveness, which admits but
Title:  small entrance to any sympathy from the green country without--oh,
Title:  weariness! heaviness!  Guinea-coast slavery of solitary
Title:  command!--when I think of all this; only half-suspected, not so
Title:  keenly known to me before--and how for forty years I have fed upon
Title:  dry salted fare--fit emblem of the dry nourishment of my soil!--when
Title:  the poorest landsman has had fresh fruit to his daily hand, and
Title:  broken the world's fresh bread to my mouldy crusts--away, whole
Title:  oceans away, from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty, and
Title:  sailed for Cape Horn the next day, leaving but one dent in my
Title:  marriage pillow--wife? wife?--rather a widow with her husband alive!
Title:  Aye, I widowed that poor girl when I married her, Starbuck; and
Title:  then, the madness, the frenzy, the boiling blood and the smoking
Title:  brow, with which, for a thousand lowerings old Ahab has furiously,
Title:  foamingly chased his prey--more a demon than a man!--aye, aye! what a
Title:  forty years' fool--fool--old fool, has old Ahab been!  Why this
Title:  strife of the chase? why weary, and palsy the arm at the oar, and the
Title:  iron, and the lance? how the richer or better is Ahab now?  Behold.
Title:  Oh, Starbuck! is it not hard, that with this weary load I bear, one
Title:  poor leg should have been snatched from under me?  Here, brush this
Title:  old hair aside; it blinds me, that I seem to weep.  Locks so grey did
Title:  never grow but from out some ashes!  But do I look very old, so very,
Title:  very old, Starbuck?  I feel deadly faint, bowed, and humped, as
Title:  though I were Adam, staggering beneath the piled centuries since
Title:  Paradise.  God!  God!  God!--crack my heart!--stave my
Title:  brain!--mockery! mockery! bitter, biting mockery of grey hairs, have
Title:  I lived enough joy to wear ye; and seem and feel thus intolerably
Title:  old?  Close! stand close to me, Starbuck; let me look into a human
Title:  eye; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky; better than to gaze
Title:  upon God.  By the green land; by the bright hearth-stone! this is the
Title:  magic glass, man; I see my wife and my child in thine eye.  No, no;
Title:  stay on board, on board!--lower not when I do; when branded Ahab
Title:  gives chase to Moby Dick.  That hazard shall not be thine.  No, no!
Title:  not with the far away home I see in that eye!"
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my Captain! my Captain! noble soul! grand old heart, after all!
Title:  why should any one give chase to that hated fish!  Away with me! let
Title:  us fly these deadly waters! let us home!  Wife and child, too, are
Title:  Starbuck's--wife and child of his brotherly, sisterly, play-fellow
Title:  youth; even as thine, sir, are the wife and child of thy loving,
Title:  longing, paternal old age!  Away! let us away!--this instant let me
Title:  alter the course!  How cheerily, how hilariously, O my Captain, would
Title:  we bowl on our way to see old Nantucket again!  I think, sir, they
Title:  have some such mild blue days, even as this, in Nantucket."
Title:  
Title:  "They have, they have.  I have seen them--some summer days in the
Title:  morning.  About this time--yes, it is his noon nap now--the boy
Title:  vivaciously wakes; sits up in bed; and his mother tells him of me, of
Title:  cannibal old me; how I am abroad upon the deep, but will yet come
Title:  back to dance him again."
Title:  
Title:  "'Tis my Mary, my Mary herself!  She promised that my boy, every
Title:  morning, should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of
Title:  his father's sail!  Yes, yes! no more! it is done! we head for
Title:  Nantucket!  Come, my Captain, study out the course, and let us away!
Title:  See, see! the boy's face from the window! the boy's hand on the
Title:  hill!"
Title:  
Title:  But Ahab's glance was averted; like a blighted fruit tree he shook,
Title:  and cast his last, cindered apple to the soil.
Title:  
Title:  "What is it, what nameless, inscrutable, unearthly thing is it; what
Title:  cozening, hidden lord and master, and cruel, remorseless emperor
Title:  commands me; that against all natural lovings and longings, I so keep
Title:  pushing, and crowding, and jamming myself on all the time; recklessly
Title:  making me ready to do what in my own proper, natural heart, I durst
Title:  not so much as dare?  Is Ahab, Ahab?  Is it I, God, or who, that
Title:  lifts this arm?  But if the great sun move not of himself; but is as an
Title:  errand-boy in heaven; nor one single star can revolve, but by some
Title:  invisible power; how then can this one small heart beat; this one
Title:  small brain think thoughts; unless God does that beating, does that
Title:  thinking, does that living, and not I.  By heaven, man, we are turned
Title:  round and round in this world, like yonder windlass, and Fate is the
Title:  handspike.  And all the time, lo! that smiling sky, and this
Title:  unsounded sea!  Look! see yon Albicore! who put it into him to chase
Title:  and fang that flying-fish?  Where do murderers go, man!  Who's to
Title:  doom, when the judge himself is dragged to the bar?  But it is a
Title:  mild, mild wind, and a mild looking sky; and the air smells now, as
Title:  if it blew from a far-away meadow; they have been making hay
Title:  somewhere under the slopes of the Andes, Starbuck, and the mowers are
Title:  sleeping among the new-mown hay.  Sleeping?  Aye, toil we how we may,
Title:  we all sleep at last on the field.  Sleep?  Aye, and rust amid
Title:  greenness; as last year's scythes flung down, and left in the half-cut
Title:  swaths--Starbuck!"
Title:  
Title:  But blanched to a corpse's hue with despair, the Mate had stolen
Title:  away.
Title:  
Title:  Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side; but started at
Title:  two reflected, fixed eyes in the water there.  Fedallah was
Title:  motionlessly leaning over the same rail.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 133
Title:  
Title:  The Chase--First Day.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  That night, in the mid-watch, when the old man--as his wont at
Title:  intervals--stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned, and
Title:  went to his pivot-hole, he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely,
Title:  snuffing up the sea air as a sagacious ship's dog will, in drawing
Title:  nigh to some barbarous isle.  He declared that a whale must be near.
Title:  Soon that peculiar odor, sometimes to a great distance given forth by
Title:  the living sperm whale, was palpable to all the watch; nor was any
Title:  mariner surprised when, after inspecting the compass, and then the
Title:  dog-vane, and then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as
Title:  nearly as possible, Ahab rapidly ordered the ship's course to be
Title:  slightly altered, and the sail to be shortened.
Title:  
Title:  The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently
Title:  vindicated at daybreak, by the sight of a long sleek on the sea
Title:  directly and lengthwise ahead, smooth as oil, and resembling in the
Title:  pleated watery wrinkles bordering it, the polished metallic-like
Title:  marks of some swift tide-rip, at the mouth of a deep, rapid stream.
Title:  
Title:  "Man the mast-heads!  Call all hands!"
Title:  
Title:  Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the
Title:  forecastle deck, Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps
Title:  that they seemed to exhale from the scuttle, so instantaneously did
Title:  they appear with their clothes in their hands.
Title:  
Title:  "What d'ye see?" cried Ahab, flattening his face to the sky.
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing, nothing sir!" was the sound hailing down in reply.
Title:  
Title:  "T'gallant sails!--stunsails! alow and aloft, and on both sides!"
Title:  
Title:  All sail being set, he now cast loose the life-line, reserved for
Title:  swaying him to the main royal-mast head; and in a few moments they
Title:  were hoisting him thither, when, while but two thirds of the way
Title:  aloft, and while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy between
Title:  the main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail, he raised a gull-like cry in
Title:  the air.  "There she blows!--there she blows!  A hump like a
Title:  snow-hill!  It is Moby Dick!"
Title:  
Title:  Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the three
Title:  look-outs, the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famous
Title:  whale they had so long been pursuing.  Ahab had now gained his final
Title:  perch, some feet above the other look-outs, Tashtego standing just
Title:  beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast, so that the Indian's
Title:  head was almost on a level with Ahab's heel.  From this height the
Title:  whale was now seen some mile or so ahead, at every roll of the sea
Title:  revealing his high sparkling hump, and regularly jetting his silent
Title:  spout into the air.  To the credulous mariners it seemed the same
Title:  silent spout they had so long ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic and
Title:  Indian Oceans.
Title:  
Title:  "And did none of ye see it before?" cried Ahab, hailing the perched
Title:  men all around him.
Title:  
Title:  "I saw him almost that same instant, sir, that Captain Ahab did, and
Title:  I cried out," said Tashtego.
Title:  
Title:  "Not the same instant; not the same--no, the doubloon is mine, Fate
Title:  reserved the doubloon for me.  I only; none of ye could have raised
Title:  the White Whale first.  There she blows!--there she blows!--there
Title:  she blows!  There again!--there again!" he cried, in long-drawn,
Title:  lingering, methodic tones, attuned to the gradual prolongings of the
Title:  whale's visible jets.  "He's going to sound!  In stunsails!  Down
Title:  top-gallant-sails!  Stand by three boats.  Mr. Starbuck, remember,
Title:  stay on board, and keep the ship.  Helm there!  Luff, luff a point!
Title:  So; steady, man, steady!  There go flukes!  No, no; only black water!
Title:  All ready the boats there?  Stand by, stand by!  Lower me, Mr.
Title:  Starbuck; lower, lower,--quick, quicker!" and he slid through the air
Title:  to the deck.
Title:  
Title:  "He is heading straight to leeward, sir," cried Stubb, "right away
Title:  from us; cannot have seen the ship yet."
Title:  
Title:  "Be dumb, man!  Stand by the braces!  Hard down the helm!--brace up!
Title:  Shiver her!--shiver her!--So; well that!  Boats, boats!"
Title:  
Title:  Soon all the boats but Starbuck's were dropped; all the boat-sails
Title:  set--all the paddles plying; with rippling swiftness, shooting to
Title:  leeward; and Ahab heading the onset.  A pale, death-glimmer lit up
Title:  Fedallah's sunken eyes; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.
Title:  
Title:  Like noiseless nautilus shells, their light prows sped through the
Title:  sea; but only slowly they neared the foe.  As they neared him, the
Title:  ocean grew still more smooth; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves;
Title:  seemed a noon-meadow, so serenely it spread.  At length the
Title:  breathless hunter came so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey, that his
Title:  entire dazzling hump was distinctly visible, sliding along the sea as
Title:  if an isolated thing, and continually set in a revolving ring of
Title:  finest, fleecy, greenish foam.  He saw the vast, involved wrinkles of
Title:  the slightly projecting head beyond.  Before it, far out on the soft
Title:  Turkish-rugged waters, went the glistening white shadow from his
Title:  broad, milky forehead, a musical rippling playfully accompanying the
Title:  shade; and behind, the blue waters interchangeably flowed over into
Title:  the moving valley of his steady wake; and on either hand bright
Title:  bubbles arose and danced by his side.  But these were broken again by
Title:  the light toes of hundreds of gay fowl softly feathering the sea,
Title:  alternate with their fitful flight; and like to some flag-staff
Title:  rising from the painted hull of an argosy, the tall but shattered
Title:  pole of a recent lance projected from the white whale's back; and at
Title:  intervals one of the cloud of soft-toed fowls hovering, and to and
Title:  fro skimming like a canopy over the fish, silently perched and rocked
Title:  on this pole, the long tail feathers streaming like pennons.
Title:  
Title:  A gentle joyousness--a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness,
Title:  invested the gliding whale.  Not the white bull Jupiter swimming away
Title:  with ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns; his lovely,
Title:  leering eyes sideways intent upon the maid; with smooth bewitching
Title:  fleetness, rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete; not
Title:  Jove, not that great majesty Supreme! did surpass the glorified White
Title:  Whale as he so divinely swam.
Title:  
Title:  On each soft side--coincident with the parted swell, that but once
Title:  leaving him, then flowed so wide away--on each bright side, the whale
Title:  shed off enticings.  No wonder there had been some among the hunters
Title:  who namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity, had
Title:  ventured to assail it; but had fatally found that quietude but the
Title:  vesture of tornadoes.  Yet calm, enticing calm, oh, whale! thou
Title:  glidest on, to all who for the first time eye thee, no matter how
Title:  many in that same way thou may'st have bejuggled and destroyed
Title:  before.
Title:  
Title:  And thus, through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea,
Title:  among waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture,
Title:  Moby Dick moved on, still withholding from sight the full terrors of
Title:  his submerged trunk, entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his
Title:  jaw.  But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water; for
Title:  an instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch, like
Title:  Virginia's Natural Bridge, and warningly waving his bannered flukes
Title:  in the air, the grand god revealed himself, sounded, and went out of
Title:  sight.  Hoveringly halting, and dipping on the wing, the white
Title:  sea-fowls longingly lingered over the agitated pool that he left.
Title:  
Title:  With oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails adrift,
Title:  the three boats now stilly floated, awaiting Moby Dick's
Title:  reappearance.
Title:  
Title:  "An hour," said Ahab, standing rooted in his boat's stern; and he
Title:  gazed beyond the whale's place, towards the dim blue spaces and wide
Title:  wooing vacancies to leeward.  It was only an instant; for again his
Title:  eyes seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle.
Title:  The breeze now freshened; the sea began to swell.
Title:  
Title:  "The birds!--the birds!" cried Tashtego.
Title:  
Title:  In long Indian file, as when herons take wing, the white birds were
Title:  now all flying towards Ahab's boat; and when within a few yards began
Title:  fluttering over the water there, wheeling round and round, with
Title:  joyous, expectant cries.  Their vision was keener than man's; Ahab
Title:  could discover no sign in the sea.  But suddenly as he peered down
Title:  and down into its depths, he profoundly saw a white living spot no
Title:  bigger than a white weasel, with wonderful celerity uprising, and
Title:  magnifying as it rose, till it turned, and then there were plainly
Title:  revealed two long crooked rows of white, glistening teeth, floating
Title:  up from the undiscoverable bottom.  It was Moby Dick's open mouth and
Title:  scrolled jaw; his vast, shadowed bulk still half blending with the
Title:  blue of the sea.  The glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat like
Title:  an open-doored marble tomb; and giving one sidelong sweep with his
Title:  steering oar, Ahab whirled the craft aside from this tremendous
Title:  apparition.  Then, calling upon Fedallah to change places with him,
Title:  went forward to the bows, and seizing Perth's harpoon, commanded his
Title:  crew to grasp their oars and stand by to stern.
Title:  
Title:  Now, by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis,
Title:  its bow, by anticipation, was made to face the whale's head while yet
Title:  under water.  But as if perceiving this stratagem, Moby Dick, with
Title:  that malicious intelligence ascribed to him, sidelingly transplanted
Title:  himself, as it were, in an instant, shooting his pleated head
Title:  lengthwise beneath the boat.
Title:  
Title:  Through and through; through every plank and each rib, it thrilled
Title:  for an instant, the whale obliquely lying on his back, in the manner
Title:  of a biting shark, slowly and feelingly taking its bows full within
Title:  his mouth, so that the long, narrow, scrolled lower jaw curled high
Title:  up into the open air, and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock.  The
Title:  bluish pearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of
Title:  Ahab's head, and reached higher than that.  In this attitude the
Title:  White Whale now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her
Title:  mouse.  With unastonished eyes Fedallah gazed, and crossed his arms;
Title:  but the tiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other's heads to
Title:  gain the uttermost stern.
Title:  
Title:  And now, while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out, as
Title:  the whale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way; and
Title:  from his body being submerged beneath the boat, he could not be
Title:  darted at from the bows, for the bows were almost inside of him, as
Title:  it were; and while the other boats involuntarily paused, as before a
Title:  quick crisis impossible to withstand, then it was that monomaniac
Title:  Ahab, furious with this tantalizing vicinity of his foe, which placed
Title:  him all alive and helpless in the very jaws he hated; frenzied with
Title:  all this, he seized the long bone with his naked hands, and wildly
Title:  strove to wrench it from its gripe.  As now he thus vainly strove,
Title:  the jaw slipped from him; the frail gunwales bent in, collapsed, and
Title:  snapped, as both jaws, like an enormous shears, sliding further aft,
Title:  bit the craft completely in twain, and locked themselves fast again
Title:  in the sea, midway between the two floating wrecks.  These floated
Title:  aside, the broken ends drooping, the crew at the stern-wreck clinging
Title:  to the gunwales, and striving to hold fast to the oars to lash them
Title:  across.
Title:  
Title:  At that preluding moment, ere the boat was yet snapped, Ahab, the
Title:  first to perceive the whale's intent, by the crafty upraising of his
Title:  head, a movement that loosed his hold for the time; at that moment
Title:  his hand had made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite.
Title:  But only slipping further into the whale's mouth, and tilting over
Title:  sideways as it slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw;
Title:  spilled him out of it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fell
Title:  flat-faced upon the sea.
Title:  
Title:  Ripplingly withdrawing from his prey, Moby Dick now lay at a little
Title:  distance, vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and down in
Title:  the billows; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindled
Title:  body; so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose--some twenty or
Title:  more feet out of the water--the now rising swells, with all their
Title:  confluent waves, dazzlingly broke against it; vindictively tossing
Title:  their shivered spray still higher into the air.*  So, in a gale, the
Title:  but half baffled Channel billows only recoil from the base of the
Title:  Eddystone, triumphantly to overleap its summit with their scud.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  *This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale.  It receives its
Title:  designation (pitchpoling) from its being likened to that preliminary
Title:  up-and-down poise of the whale-lance, in the exercise called
Title:  pitchpoling, previously described.  By this motion the whale must
Title:  best and most comprehensively view whatever objects may be encircling
Title:  him.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  But soon resuming his horizontal attitude, Moby Dick swam swiftly
Title:  round and round the wrecked crew; sideways churning the water in his
Title:  vengeful wake, as if lashing himself up to still another and more
Title:  deadly assault.  The sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden
Title:  him, as the blood of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus's
Title:  elephants in the book of Maccabees.  Meanwhile Ahab half smothered in
Title:  the foam of the whale's insolent tail, and too much of a cripple to
Title:  swim,--though he could still keep afloat, even in the heart of such a
Title:  whirlpool as that; helpless Ahab's head was seen, like a tossed
Title:  bubble which the least chance shock might burst.  From the boat's
Title:  fragmentary stern, Fedallah incuriously and mildly eyed him; the
Title:  clinging crew, at the other drifting end, could not succor him; more
Title:  than enough was it for them to look to themselves.  For so
Title:  revolvingly appalling was the White Whale's aspect, and so
Title:  planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made, that he
Title:  seemed horizontally swooping upon them.  And though the other boats,
Title:  unharmed, still hovered hard by; still they dared not pull into the
Title:  eddy to strike, lest that should be the signal for the instant
Title:  destruction of the jeopardized castaways, Ahab and all; nor in that
Title:  case could they themselves hope to escape.  With straining eyes,
Title:  then, they remained on the outer edge of the direful zone, whose
Title:  centre had now become the old man's head.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, from the beginning all this had been descried from the
Title:  ship's mast heads; and squaring her yards, she had borne down upon
Title:  the scene; and was now so nigh, that Ahab in the water hailed
Title:  her!--"Sail on the"--but that moment a breaking sea dashed on him
Title:  from Moby Dick, and whelmed him for the time.  But struggling out of
Title:  it again, and chancing to rise on a towering crest, he
Title:  shouted,--"Sail on the whale!--Drive him off!"
Title:  
Title:  The Pequod's prows were pointed; and breaking up the charmed circle,
Title:  she effectually parted the white whale from his victim.  As he
Title:  sullenly swam off, the boats flew to the rescue.
Title:  
Title:  Dragged into Stubb's boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes, the white
Title:  brine caking in his wrinkles; the long tension of Ahab's bodily
Title:  strength did crack, and helplessly he yielded to his body's doom: for
Title:  a time, lying all crushed in the bottom of Stubb's boat, like one
Title:  trodden under foot of herds of elephants.  Far inland, nameless wails
Title:  came from him, as desolate sounds from out ravines.
Title:  
Title:  But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much the
Title:  more abbreviate it.  In an instant's compass, great hearts sometimes
Title:  condense to one deep pang, the sum total of those shallow pains
Title:  kindly diffused through feebler men's whole lives.  And so, such
Title:  hearts, though summary in each one suffering; still, if the gods
Title:  decree it, in their life-time aggregate a whole age of woe, wholly
Title:  made up of instantaneous intensities; for even in their pointless
Title:  centres, those noble natures contain the entire circumferences of
Title:  inferior souls.
Title:  
Title:  "The harpoon," said Ahab, half way rising, and draggingly leaning on
Title:  one bended arm--"is it safe?"
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, sir, for it was not darted; this is it," said Stubb, showing
Title:  it.
Title:  
Title:  "Lay it before me;--any missing men?"
Title:  
Title:  "One, two, three, four, five;--there were five oars, sir, and here
Title:  are five men."
Title:  
Title:  "That's good.--Help me, man; I wish to stand.  So, so, I see him!
Title:  there! there! going to leeward still; what a leaping spout!--Hands
Title:  off from me!  The eternal sap runs up in Ahab's bones again!  Set the
Title:  sail; out oars; the helm!"
Title:  
Title:  It is often the case that when a boat is stove, its crew, being
Title:  picked up by another boat, help to work that second boat; and the
Title:  chase is thus continued with what is called double-banked oars.  It
Title:  was thus now.  But the added power of the boat did not equal the
Title:  added power of the whale, for he seemed to have treble-banked his
Title:  every fin; swimming with a velocity which plainly showed, that if
Title:  now, under these circumstances, pushed on, the chase would prove an
Title:  indefinitely prolonged, if not a hopeless one; nor could any crew
Title:  endure for so long a period, such an unintermitted, intense straining
Title:  at the oar; a thing barely tolerable only in some one brief
Title:  vicissitude.  The ship itself, then, as it sometimes happens, offered
Title:  the most promising intermediate means of overtaking the chase.
Title:  Accordingly, the boats now made for her, and were soon swayed up to
Title:  their cranes--the two parts of the wrecked boat having been
Title:  previously secured by her--and then hoisting everything to her side,
Title:  and stacking her canvas high up, and sideways outstretching it with
Title:  stun-sails, like the double-jointed wings of an albatross; the Pequod
Title:  bore down in the leeward wake of Moby-Dick.  At the well known,
Title:  methodic intervals, the whale's glittering spout was regularly
Title:  announced from the manned mast-heads; and when he would be reported
Title:  as just gone down, Ahab would take the time, and then pacing the
Title:  deck, binnacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second of the
Title:  allotted hour expired, his voice was heard.--"Whose is the doubloon
Title:  now?  D'ye see him?" and if the reply was, No, sir! straightway he
Title:  commanded them to lift him to his perch.  In this way the day wore
Title:  on; Ahab, now aloft and motionless; anon, unrestingly pacing the
Title:  planks.
Title:  
Title:  As he was thus walking, uttering no sound, except to hail the men
Title:  aloft, or to bid them hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one to
Title:  a still greater breadth--thus to and fro pacing, beneath his slouched
Title:  hat, at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat, which had been
Title:  dropped upon the quarter-deck, and lay there reversed; broken bow to
Title:  shattered stern.  At last he paused before it; and as in an already
Title:  over-clouded sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail across,
Title:  so over the old man's face there now stole some such added gloom as
Title:  this.
Title:  
Title:  Stubb saw him pause; and perhaps intending, not vainly, though, to
Title:  evince his own unabated fortitude, and thus keep up a valiant place
Title:  in his Captain's mind, he advanced, and eyeing the wreck
Title:  exclaimed--"The thistle the ass refused; it pricked his mouth too
Title:  keenly, sir; ha! ha!"
Title:  
Title:  "What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck?  Man, man!
Title:  did I not know thee brave as fearless fire (and as mechanical) I
Title:  could swear thou wert a poltroon.  Groan nor laugh should be heard
Title:  before a wreck."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, sir," said Starbuck drawing near, "'tis a solemn sight; an
Title:  omen, and an ill one."
Title:  
Title:  "Omen? omen?--the dictionary!  If the gods think to speak outright to
Title:  man, they will honourably speak outright; not shake their heads, and
Title:  give an old wives' darkling hint.--Begone!  Ye two are the opposite
Title:  poles of one thing; Starbuck is Stubb reversed, and Stubb is
Title:  Starbuck; and ye two are all mankind; and Ahab stands alone among the
Title:  millions of the peopled earth, nor gods nor men his neighbors!  Cold,
Title:  cold--I shiver!--How now?  Aloft there!  D'ye see him?  Sing out for
Title:  every spout, though he spout ten times a second!"
Title:  
Title:  The day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe was
Title:  rustling.  Soon, it was almost dark, but the look-out men still
Title:  remained unset.
Title:  
Title:  "Can't see the spout now, sir;--too dark"--cried a voice from the
Title:  air.
Title:  
Title:  "How heading when last seen?"
Title:  
Title:  "As before, sir,--straight to leeward."
Title:  
Title:  "Good! he will travel slower now 'tis night.  Down royals and
Title:  top-gallant stun-sails, Mr. Starbuck.  We must not run over him
Title:  before morning; he's making a passage now, and may heave-to a while.
Title:  Helm there! keep her full before the wind!--Aloft! come down!--Mr.
Title:  Stubb, send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head, and see it manned
Title:  till morning."--Then advancing towards the doubloon in the
Title:  main-mast--"Men, this gold is mine, for I earned it; but I shall let
Title:  it abide here till the White Whale is dead; and then, whosoever of ye
Title:  first raises him, upon the day he shall be killed, this gold is that
Title:  man's; and if on that day I shall again raise him, then, ten times
Title:  its sum shall be divided among all of ye!  Away now!--the deck is
Title:  thine, sir!"
Title:  
Title:  And so saying, he placed himself half way within the scuttle, and
Title:  slouching his hat, stood there till dawn, except when at intervals
Title:  rousing himself to see how the night wore on.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 134
Title:  
Title:  The Chase--Second Day.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  At day-break, the three mast-heads were punctually manned afresh.
Title:  
Title:  "D'ye see him?" cried Ahab after allowing a little space for the
Title:  light to spread.
Title:  
Title:  "See nothing, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Turn up all hands and make sail! he travels faster than I thought
Title:  for;--the top-gallant sails!--aye, they should have been kept on her
Title:  all night.  But no matter--'tis but resting for the rush."
Title:  
Title:  Here be it said, that this pertinacious pursuit of one particular
Title:  whale, continued through day into night, and through night into day,
Title:  is a thing by no means unprecedented in the South sea fishery.  For
Title:  such is the wonderful skill, prescience of experience, and invincible
Title:  confidence acquired by some great natural geniuses among the
Title:  Nantucket commanders; that from the simple observation of a whale
Title:  when last descried, they will, under certain given circumstances,
Title:  pretty accurately foretell both the direction in which he will
Title:  continue to swim for a time, while out of sight, as well as his
Title:  probable rate of progression during that period.  And, in these
Title:  cases, somewhat as a pilot, when about losing sight of a coast, whose
Title:  general trending he well knows, and which he desires shortly to
Title:  return to again, but at some further point; like as this pilot stands
Title:  by his compass, and takes the precise bearing of the cape at present
Title:  visible, in order the more certainly to hit aright the remote, unseen
Title:  headland, eventually to be visited: so does the fisherman, at his
Title:  compass, with the whale; for after being chased, and diligently
Title:  marked, through several hours of daylight, then, when night obscures
Title:  the fish, the creature's future wake through the darkness is almost
Title:  as established to the sagacious mind of the hunter, as the pilot's
Title:  coast is to him.  So that to this hunter's wondrous skill, the
Title:  proverbial evanescence of a thing writ in water, a wake, is to all
Title:  desired purposes well nigh as reliable as the steadfast land.  And as
Title:  the mighty iron Leviathan of the modern railway is so familiarly
Title:  known in its every pace, that, with watches in their hands, men time
Title:  his rate as doctors that of a baby's pulse; and lightly say of it,
Title:  the up train or the down train will reach such or such a spot, at
Title:  such or such an hour; even so, almost, there are occasions when these
Title:  Nantucketers time that other Leviathan of the deep, according to the
Title:  observed humor of his speed; and say to themselves, so many hours
Title:  hence this whale will have gone two hundred miles, will have about
Title:  reached this or that degree of latitude or longitude.  But to render
Title:  this acuteness at all successful in the end, the wind and the sea
Title:  must be the whaleman's allies; for of what present avail to the
Title:  becalmed or windbound mariner is the skill that assures him he is
Title:  exactly ninety-three leagues and a quarter from his port?  Inferable
Title:  from these statements, are many collateral subtile matters touching
Title:  the chase of whales.
Title:  
Title:  The ship tore on; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when a
Title:  cannon-ball, missent, becomes a plough-share and turns up the level
Title:  field.
Title:  
Title:  "By salt and hemp!" cried Stubb, "but this swift motion of the deck
Title:  creeps up one's legs and tingles at the heart.  This ship and I are
Title:  two brave fellows!--Ha, ha!  Some one take me up, and launch me,
Title:  spine-wise, on the sea,--for by live-oaks! my spine's a keel.  Ha,
Title:  ha! we go the gait that leaves no dust behind!"
Title:  
Title:  "There she blows--she blows!--she blows!--right ahead!" was now the
Title:  mast-head cry.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye!" cried Stubb, "I knew it--ye can't escape--blow on and
Title:  split your spout, O whale! the mad fiend himself is after ye! blow
Title:  your trump--blister your lungs!--Ahab will dam off your blood, as a
Title:  miller shuts his watergate upon the stream!"
Title:  
Title:  And Stubb did but speak out for well nigh all that crew.  The
Title:  frenzies of the chase had by this time worked them bubblingly up,
Title:  like old wine worked anew.  Whatever pale fears and forebodings some
Title:  of them might have felt before; these were not only now kept out of
Title:  sight through the growing awe of Ahab, but they were broken up, and
Title:  on all sides routed, as timid prairie hares that scatter before the
Title:  bounding bison.  The hand of Fate had snatched all their souls; and
Title:  by the stirring perils of the previous day; the rack of the past
Title:  night's suspense; the fixed, unfearing, blind, reckless way in which
Title:  their wild craft went plunging towards its flying mark; by all these
Title:  things, their hearts were bowled along.  The wind that made great
Title:  bellies of their sails, and rushed the vessel on by arms invisible as
Title:  irresistible; this seemed the symbol of that unseen agency which so
Title:  enslaved them to the race.
Title:  
Title:  They were one man, not thirty.  For as the one ship that held them
Title:  all; though it was put together of all contrasting things--oak, and
Title:  maple, and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp--yet all these ran
Title:  into each other in the one concrete hull, which shot on its way, both
Title:  balanced and directed by the long central keel; even so, all the
Title:  individualities of the crew, this man's valor, that man's fear; guilt
Title:  and guiltiness, all varieties were welded into oneness, and were all
Title:  directed to that fatal goal which Ahab their one lord and keel did
Title:  point to.
Title:  
Title:  The rigging lived.  The mast-heads, like the tops of tall palms, were
Title:  outspreadingly tufted with arms and legs.  Clinging to a spar with
Title:  one hand, some reached forth the other with impatient wavings;
Title:  others, shading their eyes from the vivid sunlight, sat far out on
Title:  the rocking yards; all the spars in full bearing of mortals, ready
Title:  and ripe for their fate.  Ah! how they still strove through that
Title:  infinite blueness to seek out the thing that might destroy them!
Title:  
Title:  "Why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?" cried Ahab, when, after
Title:  the lapse of some minutes since the first cry, no more had been
Title:  heard.  "Sway me up, men; ye have been deceived; not Moby Dick casts
Title:  one odd jet that way, and then disappears."
Title:  
Title:  It was even so; in their headlong eagerness, the men had mistaken
Title:  some other thing for the whale-spout, as the event itself soon
Title:  proved; for hardly had Ahab reached his perch; hardly was the rope
Title:  belayed to its pin on deck, when he struck the key-note to an
Title:  orchestra, that made the air vibrate as with the combined discharges
Title:  of rifles.  The triumphant halloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard,
Title:  as--much nearer to the ship than the place of the imaginary jet, less
Title:  than a mile ahead--Moby Dick bodily burst into view!  For not by any
Title:  calm and indolent spoutings; not by the peaceable gush of that mystic
Title:  fountain in his head, did the White Whale now reveal his vicinity;
Title:  but by the far more wondrous phenomenon of breaching.  Rising with
Title:  his utmost velocity from the furthest depths, the Sperm Whale thus
Title:  booms his entire bulk into the pure element of air, and piling up a
Title:  mountain of dazzling foam, shows his place to the distance of seven
Title:  miles and more.  In those moments, the torn, enraged waves he shakes
Title:  off, seem his mane; in some cases, this breaching is his act of
Title:  defiance.
Title:  
Title:  "There she breaches! there she breaches!" was the cry, as in his
Title:  immeasurable bravadoes the White Whale tossed himself salmon-like to
Title:  Heaven.  So suddenly seen in the blue plain of the sea, and relieved
Title:  against the still bluer margin of the sky, the spray that he raised,
Title:  for the moment, intolerably glittered and glared like a glacier; and
Title:  stood there gradually fading and fading away from its first sparkling
Title:  intensity, to the dim mistiness of an advancing shower in a vale.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, breach your last to the sun, Moby Dick!" cried Ahab, "thy hour
Title:  and thy harpoon are at hand!--Down! down all of ye, but one man at
Title:  the fore.  The boats!--stand by!"
Title:  
Title:  Unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds, the men, like
Title:  shooting stars, slid to the deck, by the isolated backstays and
Title:  halyards; while Ahab, less dartingly, but still rapidly was dropped
Title:  from his perch.
Title:  
Title:  "Lower away," he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat--a spare
Title:  one, rigged the afternoon previous.  "Mr. Starbuck, the ship is
Title:  thine--keep away from the boats, but keep near them.  Lower, all!"
Title:  
Title:  As if to strike a quick terror into them, by this time being the
Title:  first assailant himself, Moby Dick had turned, and was now coming for
Title:  the three crews.  Ahab's boat was central; and cheering his men, he
Title:  told them he would take the whale head-and-head,--that is, pull
Title:  straight up to his forehead,--a not uncommon thing; for when within a
Title:  certain limit, such a course excludes the coming onset from the
Title:  whale's sidelong vision.  But ere that close limit was gained, and
Title:  while yet all three boats were plain as the ship's three masts to his
Title:  eye; the White Whale churning himself into furious speed, almost in
Title:  an instant as it were, rushing among the boats with open jaws, and a
Title:  lashing tail, offered appalling battle on every side; and heedless of
Title:  the irons darted at him from every boat, seemed only intent on
Title:  annihilating each separate plank of which those boats were made.  But
Title:  skilfully manoeuvred, incessantly wheeling like trained chargers in
Title:  the field; the boats for a while eluded him; though, at times, but by
Title:  a plank's breadth; while all the time, Ahab's unearthly slogan tore
Title:  every other cry but his to shreds.
Title:  
Title:  But at last in his untraceable evolutions, the White Whale so crossed
Title:  and recrossed, and in a thousand ways entangled the slack of the
Title:  three lines now fast to him, that they foreshortened, and, of
Title:  themselves, warped the devoted boats towards the planted irons in
Title:  him; though now for a moment the whale drew aside a little, as if to
Title:  rally for a more tremendous charge.  Seizing that opportunity, Ahab
Title:  first paid out more line: and then was rapidly hauling and jerking
Title:  in upon it again--hoping that way to disencumber it of some
Title:  snarls--when lo!--a sight more savage than the embattled teeth of
Title:  sharks!
Title:  
Title:  Caught and twisted--corkscrewed in the mazes of the line, loose
Title:  harpoons and lances, with all their bristling barbs and points, came
Title:  flashing and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab's boat.
Title:  Only one thing could be done.  Seizing the boat-knife, he critically
Title:  reached within--through--and then, without--the rays of steel;
Title:  dragged in the line beyond, passed it, inboard, to the bowsman, and
Title:  then, twice sundering the rope near the chocks--dropped the
Title:  intercepted fagot of steel into the sea; and was all fast again.
Title:  That instant, the White Whale made a sudden rush among the remaining
Title:  tangles of the other lines; by so doing, irresistibly dragged the
Title:  more involved boats of Stubb and Flask towards his flukes; dashed
Title:  them together like two rolling husks on a surf-beaten beach, and
Title:  then, diving down into the sea, disappeared in a boiling maelstrom,
Title:  in which, for a space, the odorous cedar chips of the wrecks danced
Title:  round and round, like the grated nutmeg in a swiftly stirred bowl of
Title:  punch.
Title:  
Title:  While the two crews were yet circling in the waters, reaching out
Title:  after the revolving line-tubs, oars, and other floating furniture,
Title:  while aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial,
Title:  twitching his legs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks; and
Title:  Stubb was lustily singing out for some one to ladle him up; and while
Title:  the old man's line--now parting--admitted of his pulling into the
Title:  creamy pool to rescue whom he could;--in that wild simultaneousness
Title:  of a thousand concreted perils,--Ahab's yet unstricken boat seemed
Title:  drawn up towards Heaven by invisible wires,--as, arrow-like, shooting
Title:  perpendicularly from the sea, the White Whale dashed his broad
Title:  forehead against its bottom, and sent it, turning over and over, into
Title:  the air; till it fell again--gunwale downwards--and Ahab and his men
Title:  struggled out from under it, like seals from a sea-side cave.
Title:  
Title:  The first uprising momentum of the whale--modifying its direction as
Title:  he struck the surface--involuntarily launched him along it, to a
Title:  little distance from the centre of the destruction he had made; and
Title:  with his back to it, he now lay for a moment slowly feeling with his
Title:  flukes from side to side; and whenever a stray oar, bit of plank, the
Title:  least chip or crumb of the boats touched his skin, his tail swiftly
Title:  drew back, and came sideways smiting the sea.  But soon, as if
Title:  satisfied that his work for that time was done, he pushed his pleated
Title:  forehead through the ocean, and trailing after him the intertangled
Title:  lines, continued his leeward way at a traveller's methodic pace.
Title:  
Title:  As before, the attentive ship having descried the whole fight, again
Title:  came bearing down to the rescue, and dropping a boat, picked up the
Title:  floating mariners, tubs, oars, and whatever else could be caught at,
Title:  and safely landed them on her decks.  Some sprained shoulders,
Title:  wrists, and ankles; livid contusions; wrenched harpoons and lances;
Title:  inextricable intricacies of rope; shattered oars and planks; all
Title:  these were there; but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to have
Title:  befallen any one.  As with Fedallah the day before, so Ahab was now
Title:  found grimly clinging to his boat's broken half, which afforded a
Title:  comparatively easy float; nor did it so exhaust him as the previous
Title:  day's mishap.
Title:  
Title:  But when he was helped to the deck, all eyes were fastened upon him;
Title:  as instead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon the
Title:  shoulder of Starbuck, who had thus far been the foremost to assist
Title:  him.  His ivory leg had been snapped off, leaving but one short sharp
Title:  splinter.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, Starbuck, 'tis sweet to lean sometimes, be the leaner who
Title:  he will; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has."
Title:  
Title:  "The ferrule has not stood, sir," said the carpenter, now coming up;
Title:  "I put good work into that leg."
Title:  
Title:  "But no bones broken, sir, I hope," said Stubb with true concern.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye! and all splintered to pieces, Stubb!--d'ye see it.--But even
Title:  with a broken bone, old Ahab is untouched; and I account no living
Title:  bone of mine one jot more me, than this dead one that's lost.  Nor
Title:  white whale, nor man, nor fiend, can so much as graze old Ahab in his
Title:  own proper and inaccessible being.  Can any lead touch yonder floor,
Title:  any mast scrape yonder roof?--Aloft there! which way?"
Title:  
Title:  "Dead to leeward, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Up helm, then; pile on the sail again, ship keepers! down the rest
Title:  of the spare boats and rig them--Mr. Starbuck away, and muster the
Title:  boat's crews."
Title:  
Title:  "Let me first help thee towards the bulwarks, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, oh, oh! how this splinter gores me now!  Accursed fate! that the
Title:  unconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate!"
Title:  
Title:  "Sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "My body, man, not thee.  Give me something for a cane--there, that
Title:  shivered lance will do.  Muster the men.  Surely I have not seen him
Title:  yet.  By heaven it cannot be!--missing?--quick! call them all."
Title:  
Title:  The old man's hinted thought was true.  Upon mustering the company,
Title:  the Parsee was not there.
Title:  
Title:  "The Parsee!" cried Stubb--"he must have been caught in--"
Title:  
Title:  "The black vomit wrench thee!--run all of ye above, alow, cabin,
Title:  forecastle--find him--not gone--not gone!"
Title:  
Title:  But quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the Parsee was
Title:  nowhere to be found.
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, sir," said Stubb--"caught among the tangles of your line--I
Title:  thought I saw him dragging under."
Title:  
Title:  "MY line! MY line?  Gone?--gone?  What means that little word?--What
Title:  death-knell rings in it, that old Ahab shakes as if he were the
Title:  belfry.  The harpoon, too!--toss over the litter there,--d'ye see
Title:  it?--the forged iron, men, the white whale's--no, no, no,--blistered
Title:  fool! this hand did dart it!--'tis in the fish!--Aloft there!  Keep
Title:  him nailed--Quick!--all hands to the rigging of the boats--collect
Title:  the oars--harpooneers! the irons, the irons!--hoist the royals higher--a
Title:  pull on all the sheets!--helm there! steady, steady for your life!
Title:  I'll ten times girdle the unmeasured globe; yea and dive straight
Title:  through it, but I'll slay him yet!
Title:  
Title:  "Great God! but for one single instant show thyself," cried Starbuck;
Title:  "never, never wilt thou capture him, old man--In Jesus' name no more
Title:  of this, that's worse than devil's madness.  Two days chased; twice
Title:  stove to splinters; thy very leg once more snatched from under thee;
Title:  thy evil shadow gone--all good angels mobbing thee with warnings:--
Title:  what more wouldst thou have?--Shall we keep chasing this murderous
Title:  fish till he swamps the last man?  Shall we be dragged by him to the
Title:  bottom of the sea?  Shall we be towed by him to the infernal world?
Title:  Oh, oh,--Impiety and blasphemy to hunt him more!"
Title:  
Title:  "Starbuck, of late I've felt strangely moved to thee; ever since that
Title:  hour we both saw--thou know'st what, in one another's eyes.  But in
Title:  this matter of the whale, be the front of thy face to me as the palm
Title:  of this hand--a lipless, unfeatured blank.  Ahab is for ever Ahab,
Title:  man.  This whole act's immutably decreed.  'Twas rehearsed by thee
Title:  and me a billion years before this ocean rolled.  Fool!  I am the
Title:  Fates' lieutenant; I act under orders.  Look thou, underling! that
Title:  thou obeyest mine.--Stand round me, men.  Ye see an old man cut down
Title:  to the stump; leaning on a shivered lance; propped up on a lonely
Title:  foot.  'Tis Ahab--his body's part; but Ahab's soul's a centipede,
Title:  that moves upon a hundred legs.  I feel strained, half stranded, as
Title:  ropes that tow dismasted frigates in a gale; and I may look so.  But
Title:  ere I break, yell hear me crack; and till ye hear THAT, know that
Title:  Ahab's hawser tows his purpose yet.  Believe ye, men, in the things
Title:  called omens?  Then laugh aloud, and cry encore!  For ere they drown,
Title:  drowning things will twice rise to the surface; then rise again, to
Title:  sink for evermore.  So with Moby Dick--two days he's floated--tomorrow
Title:  will be the third.  Aye, men, he'll rise once more,--but only to
Title:  spout his last!  D'ye feel brave men, brave?"
Title:  
Title:  "As fearless fire," cried Stubb.
Title:  
Title:  "And as mechanical," muttered Ahab.  Then as the men went forward, he
Title:  muttered on: "The things called omens!  And yesterday I talked the
Title:  same to Starbuck there, concerning my broken boat.  Oh! how valiantly
Title:  I seek to drive out of others' hearts what's clinched so fast in
Title:  mine!--The Parsee--the Parsee!--gone, gone? and he was to go
Title:  before:--but still was to be seen again ere I could perish--How's
Title:  that?--There's a riddle now might baffle all the lawyers backed by
Title:  the ghosts of the whole line of judges:--like a hawk's beak it pecks
Title:  my brain.  I'LL, I'LL solve it, though!"
Title:  
Title:  When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.
Title:  
Title:  So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed nearly as
Title:  on the previous night; only, the sound of hammers, and the hum of the
Title:  grindstone was heard till nearly daylight, as the men toiled by
Title:  lanterns in the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats and
Title:  sharpening their fresh weapons for the morrow.  Meantime, of the
Title:  broken keel of Ahab's wrecked craft the carpenter made him another
Title:  leg; while still as on the night before, slouched Ahab stood fixed
Title:  within his scuttle; his hid, heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone
Title:  backward on its dial; sat due eastward for the earliest sun.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  CHAPTER 135
Title:  
Title:  The Chase.--Third Day.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the
Title:  solitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of
Title:  the daylight look-outs, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.
Title:  
Title:  "D'ye see him?" cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.
Title:  
Title:  "In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that's all.
Title:  Helm there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been going.  What a
Title:  lovely day again! were it a new-made world, and made for a
Title:  summer-house to the angels, and this morning the first of its
Title:  throwing open to them, a fairer day could not dawn upon that world.
Title:  Here's food for thought, had Ahab time to think; but Ahab never
Title:  thinks; he only feels, feels, feels; THAT'S tingling enough for
Title:  mortal man! to think's audacity.  God only has that right and
Title:  privilege.  Thinking is, or ought to be, a coolness and a calmness;
Title:  and our poor hearts throb, and our poor brains beat too much for
Title:  that.  And yet, I've sometimes thought my brain was very calm--frozen
Title:  calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which the contents
Title:  turned to ice, and shiver it.  And still this hair is growing now;
Title:  this moment growing, and heat must breed it; but no, it's like that
Title:  sort of common grass that will grow anywhere, between the earthy
Title:  clefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava.  How the wild winds blow
Title:  it; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash the
Title:  tossed ship they cling to.  A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere
Title:  this through prison corridors and cells, and wards of hospitals, and
Title:  ventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as fleeces.
Title:  Out upon it!--it's tainted.  Were I the wind, I'd blow no more on
Title:  such a wicked, miserable world.  I'd crawl somewhere to a cave, and
Title:  slink there.  And yet, 'tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who
Title:  ever conquered it?  In every fight it has the last and bitterest
Title:  blow.  Run tilting at it, and you but run through it.  Ha! a coward
Title:  wind that strikes stark naked men, but will not stand to receive a
Title:  single blow.  Even Ahab is a braver thing--a nobler thing than THAT.
Title:  Would now the wind but had a body; but all the things that most
Title:  exasperate and outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, but
Title:  only bodiless as objects, not as agents.  There's a most special, a
Title:  most cunning, oh, a most malicious difference!  And yet, I say again,
Title:  and swear it now, that there's something all glorious and gracious in
Title:  the wind.  These warm Trade Winds, at least, that in the clear
Title:  heavens blow straight on, in strong and steadfast, vigorous mildness;
Title:  and veer not from their mark, however the baser currents of the sea
Title:  may turn and tack, and mightiest Mississippies of the land swift and
Title:  swerve about, uncertain where to go at last.  And by the eternal
Title:  Poles! these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on; these
Title:  Trades, or something like them--something so unchangeable, and full
Title:  as strong, blow my keeled soul along!  To it!  Aloft there!  What
Title:  d'ye see?"
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing, sir."
Title:  
Title:  "Nothing! and noon at hand!  The doubloon goes a-begging!  See the
Title:  sun!  Aye, aye, it must be so.  I've oversailed him.  How, got the
Title:  start?  Aye, he's chasing ME now; not I, HIM--that's bad; I might
Title:  have known it, too.  Fool! the lines--the harpoons he's towing.  Aye,
Title:  aye, I have run him by last night.  About! about!  Come down, all of
Title:  ye, but the regular look outs!  Man the braces!"
Title:  
Title:  Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod's
Title:  quarter, so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the
Title:  braced ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in
Title:  her own white wake.
Title:  
Title:  "Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw," murmured Starbuck
Title:  to himself, as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail.
Title:  "God keep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the
Title:  inside wet my flesh.  I misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying
Title:  him!"
Title:  
Title:  "Stand by to sway me up!" cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket.
Title:  "We should meet him soon."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, aye, sir," and straightway Starbuck did Ahab's bidding, and
Title:  once more Ahab swung on high.
Title:  
Title:  A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages.  Time itself now
Title:  held long breaths with keen suspense.  But at last, some three points
Title:  off the weather bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly
Title:  from the three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of
Title:  fire had voiced it.
Title:  
Title:  "Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick!  On
Title:  deck there!--brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind's eye.  He's
Title:  too far off to lower yet, Mr. Starbuck.  The sails shake!  Stand over
Title:  that helmsman with a top-maul!  So, so; he travels fast, and I must
Title:  down.  But let me have one more good round look aloft here at the
Title:  sea; there's time for that.  An old, old sight, and yet somehow so
Title:  young; aye, and not changed a wink since I first saw it, a boy, from
Title:  the sand-hills of Nantucket!  The same!--the same!--the same to Noah
Title:  as to me.  There's a soft shower to leeward.  Such lovely
Title:  leewardings!  They must lead somewhere--to something else than common
Title:  land, more palmy than the palms.  Leeward! the white whale goes that
Title:  way; look to windward, then; the better if the bitterer quarter.  But
Title:  good bye, good bye, old mast-head!  What's this?--green? aye, tiny
Title:  mosses in these warped cracks.  No such green weather stains on
Title:  Ahab's head!  There's the difference now between man's old age and
Title:  matter's.  But aye, old mast, we both grow old together; sound in our
Title:  hulls, though, are we not, my ship?  Aye, minus a leg, that's all.
Title:  By heaven this dead wood has the better of my live flesh every way.
Title:  I can't compare with it; and I've known some ships made of dead trees
Title:  outlast the lives of men made of the most vital stuff of vital
Title:  fathers.  What's that he said? he should still go before me, my
Title:  pilot; and yet to be seen again?  But where?  Will I have eyes at the
Title:  bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those endless stairs? and all
Title:  night I've been sailing from him, wherever he did sink to.  Aye, aye,
Title:  like many more thou told'st direful truth as touching thyself, O
Title:  Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short.  Good-bye,
Title:  mast-head--keep a good eye upon the whale, the while I'm gone.  We'll
Title:  talk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down there,
Title:  tied by head and tail."
Title:  
Title:  He gave the word; and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered
Title:  through the cloven blue air to the deck.
Title:  
Title:  In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop's
Title:  stern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to
Title:  the mate,--who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck--and bade him
Title:  pause.
Title:  
Title:  "Starbuck!"
Title:  
Title:  "Sir?"
Title:  
Title:  "For the third time my soul's ship starts upon this voyage,
Title:  Starbuck."
Title:  
Title:  "Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so."
Title:  
Title:  "Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing,
Title:  Starbuck!"
Title:  
Title:  "Truth, sir: saddest truth."
Title:  
Title:  "Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of the
Title:  flood;--and I feel now like a billow that's all one crested comb,
Title:  Starbuck.  I am old;--shake hands with me, man."
Title:  
Title:  Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck's tears the glue.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh, my captain, my captain!--noble heart--go not--go not!--see, it's
Title:  a brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!"
Title:  
Title:  "Lower away!"--cried Ahab, tossing the mate's arm from him.  "Stand
Title:  by the crew!"
Title:  
Title:  In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.
Title:  
Title:  "The sharks! the sharks!" cried a voice from the low cabin-window
Title:  there; "O master, my master, come back!"
Title:  
Title:  But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and
Title:  the boat leaped on.
Title:  
Title:  Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship,
Title:  when numbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters
Title:  beneath the hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars,
Title:  every time they dipped in the water; and in this way accompanied the
Title:  boat with their bites.  It is a thing not uncommonly happening to the
Title:  whale-boats in those swarming seas; the sharks at times apparently
Title:  following them in the same prescient way that vultures hover over the
Title:  banners of marching regiments in the east.  But these were the first
Title:  sharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had
Title:  been first descried; and whether it was that Ahab's crew were all
Title:  such tiger-yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to
Title:  the senses of the sharks--a matter sometimes well known to affect
Title:  them,--however it was, they seemed to follow that one boat without
Title:  molesting the others.
Title:  
Title:  "Heart of wrought steel!" murmured Starbuck gazing over the side, and
Title:  following with his eyes the receding boat--"canst thou yet ring
Title:  boldly to that sight?--lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and
Title:  followed by them, open-mouthed to the chase; and this the critical
Title:  third day?--For when three days flow together in one continuous
Title:  intense pursuit; be sure the first is the morning, the second the
Title:  noon, and the third the evening and the end of that thing--be that
Title:  end what it may.  Oh! my God! what is this that shoots through me,
Title:  and leaves me so deadly calm, yet expectant,--fixed at the top of a
Title:  shudder!  Future things swim before me, as in empty outlines and
Title:  skeletons; all the past is somehow grown dim.  Mary, girl! thou
Title:  fadest in pale glories behind me; boy!  I seem to see but thy eyes
Title:  grown wondrous blue.  Strangest problems of life seem clearing; but
Title:  clouds sweep between--Is my journey's end coming?  My legs feel
Title:  faint; like his who has footed it all day.  Feel thy heart,--beats
Title:  it yet?  Stir thyself, Starbuck!--stave it off--move, move! speak
Title:  aloud!--Mast-head there!  See ye my boy's hand on the
Title:  hill?--Crazed;--aloft there!--keep thy keenest eye upon the boats:--
Title:  mark well the whale!--Ho! again!--drive off that hawk! see! he
Title:  pecks--he tears the vane"--pointing to the red flag flying at the
Title:  main-truck--"Ha! he soars away with it!--Where's the old man now?
Title:  see'st thou that sight, oh Ahab!--shudder, shudder!"
Title:  
Title:  The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the
Title:  mast-heads--a downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had
Title:  sounded; but intending to be near him at the next rising, he held on
Title:  his way a little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crew
Title:  maintaining the profoundest silence, as the head-beat waves hammered
Title:  and hammered against the opposing bow.
Title:  
Title:  "Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their uttermost heads
Title:  drive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and
Title:  no hearse can be mine:--and hemp only can kill me!  Ha! ha!"
Title:  
Title:  Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then
Title:  quickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of
Title:  ice, swiftly rising to the surface.  A low rumbling sound was heard;
Title:  a subterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as bedraggled
Title:  with trailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shot
Title:  lengthwise, but obliquely from the sea.  Shrouded in a thin drooping
Title:  veil of mist, it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and then
Title:  fell swamping back into the deep.  Crushed thirty feet upwards, the
Title:  waters flashed for an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly
Title:  sank in a shower of flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like
Title:  new milk round the marble trunk of the whale.
Title:  
Title:  "Give way!" cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward
Title:  to the attack; but maddened by yesterday's fresh irons that corroded
Title:  in him, Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that
Title:  fell from heaven.  The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his
Title:  broad white forehead, beneath the transparent skin, looked knitted
Title:  together; as head on, he came churning his tail among the boats; and
Title:  once more flailed them apart; spilling out the irons and lances from
Title:  the two mates' boats, and dashing in one side of the upper part of
Title:  their bows, but leaving Ahab's almost without a scar.
Title:  
Title:  While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as
Title:  the whale swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank
Title:  as he shot by them again; at that moment a quick cry went up.  Lashed
Title:  round and round to the fish's back; pinioned in the turns upon turns
Title:  in which, during the past night, the whale had reeled the involutions
Title:  of the lines around him, the half torn body of the Parsee was seen;
Title:  his sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended eyes turned full
Title:  upon old Ahab.
Title:  
Title:  The harpoon dropped from his hand.
Title:  
Title:  "Befooled, befooled!"--drawing in a long lean breath--"Aye, Parsee!
Title:  I see thee again.--Aye, and thou goest before; and this, THIS then is
Title:  the hearse that thou didst promise.  But I hold thee to the last
Title:  letter of thy word.  Where is the second hearse?  Away, mates, to the
Title:  ship! those boats are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, and
Title:  return to me; if not, Ahab is enough to die--Down, men! the first
Title:  thing that but offers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing I
Title:  harpoon.  Ye are not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obey
Title:  me.--Where's the whale? gone down again?"
Title:  
Title:  But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with
Title:  the corpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the last
Title:  encounter had been but a stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was
Title:  now again steadily swimming forward; and had almost passed the
Title:  ship,--which thus far had been sailing in the contrary direction to
Title:  him, though for the present her headway had been stopped.  He seemed
Title:  swimming with his utmost velocity, and now only intent upon pursuing
Title:  his own straight path in the sea.
Title:  
Title:  "Oh!  Ahab," cried Starbuck, "not too late is it, even now, the third
Title:  day, to desist.  See!  Moby Dick seeks thee not.  It is thou, thou,
Title:  that madly seekest him!"
Title:  
Title:  Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled
Title:  to leeward, by both oars and canvas.  And at last when Ahab was
Title:  sliding by the vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck's
Title:  face as he leaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel
Title:  about, and follow him, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval.
Title:  Glancing upwards, he saw Tashtego, Queequeg, and Daggoo, eagerly
Title:  mounting to the three mast-heads; while the oarsmen were rocking in
Title:  the two staved boats which had but just been hoisted to the side, and
Title:  were busily at work in repairing them.  One after the other, through
Title:  the port-holes, as he sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb
Title:  and Flask, busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and
Title:  lances.  As he saw all this; as he heard the hammers in the broken
Title:  boats; far other hammers seemed driving a nail into his heart.  But
Title:  he rallied.  And now marking that the vane or flag was gone from the
Title:  main-mast-head, he shouted to Tashtego, who had just gained that
Title:  perch, to descend again for another flag, and a hammer and nails, and
Title:  so nail it to the mast.
Title:  
Title:  Whether fagged by the three days' running chase, and the resistance
Title:  to his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was some
Title:  latent deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White
Title:  Whale's way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so
Title:  rapidly nearing him once more; though indeed the whale's last start
Title:  had not been so long a one as before.  And still as Ahab glided over
Title:  the waves the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciously
Title:  stuck to the boat; and so continually bit at the plying oars, that
Title:  the blades became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in
Title:  the sea, at almost every dip.
Title:  
Title:  "Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars.  Pull
Title:  on! 'tis the better rest, the shark's jaw than the yielding water."
Title:  
Title:  "But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!"
Title:  
Title:  "They will last long enough! pull on!--But who can tell"--he
Title:  muttered--"whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on
Title:  Ahab?--But pull on!  Aye, all alive, now--we near him.  The helm!
Title:  take the helm! let me pass,"--and so saying two of the oarsmen helped
Title:  him forward to the bows of the still flying boat.
Title:  
Title:  At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along
Title:  with the White Whale's flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its
Title:  advance--as the whale sometimes will--and Ahab was fairly within the
Title:  smoky mountain mist, which, thrown off from the whale's spout, curled
Title:  round his great, Monadnock hump; he was even thus close to him; when,
Title:  with body arched back, and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to the
Title:  poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into the
Title:  hated whale.  As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as if
Title:  sucked into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically
Title:  rolled his nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in
Title:  it, so suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the
Title:  elevated part of the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once
Title:  more have been tossed into the sea.  As it was, three of the
Title:  oarsmen--who foreknew not the precise instant of the dart, and were
Title:  therefore unprepared for its effects--these were flung out; but so
Title:  fell, that, in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again, and
Title:  rising to its level on a combing wave, hurled themselves bodily
Title:  inboard again; the third man helplessly dropping astern, but still
Title:  afloat and swimming.
Title:  
Title:  Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,
Title:  instantaneous swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering
Title:  sea.  But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns with
Title:  the line, and hold it so; and commanded the crew to turn round on
Title:  their seats, and tow the boat up to the mark; the moment the
Title:  treacherous line felt that double strain and tug, it snapped in the
Title:  empty air!
Title:  
Title:  "What breaks in me?  Some sinew cracks!--'tis whole again; oars!
Title:  oars!  Burst in upon him!"
Title:  
Title:  Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale
Title:  wheeled round to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that
Title:  evolution, catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship;
Title:  seemingly seeing in it the source of all his persecutions; bethinking
Title:  it--it may be--a larger and nobler foe; of a sudden, he bore down
Title:  upon its advancing prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.
Title:  
Title:  Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead.  "I grow blind; hands!
Title:  stretch out before me that I may yet grope my way.  Is't night?"
Title:  
Title:  "The whale!  The ship!" cried the cringing oarsmen.
Title:  
Title:  "Oars! oars!  Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be
Title:  for ever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his
Title:  mark!  I see: the ship! the ship!  Dash on, my men!  Will ye not
Title:  save my ship?"
Title:  
Title:  But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the
Title:  sledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two
Title:  planks burst through, and in an instant almost, the temporarily
Title:  disabled boat lay nearly level with the waves; its half-wading,
Title:  splashing crew, trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the pouring
Title:  water.
Title:  
Title:  Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego's mast-head hammer
Title:  remained suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him
Title:  as with a plaid, then streamed itself straight out from him, as his
Title:  own forward-flowing heart; while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon
Title:  the bowsprit beneath, caught sight of the down-coming monster just as
Title:  soon as he.
Title:  
Title:  "The whale, the whale!  Up helm, up helm!  Oh, all ye sweet powers of
Title:  air, now hug me close!  Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in a
Title:  woman's fainting fit.  Up helm, I say--ye fools, the jaw! the jaw!
Title:  Is this the end of all my bursting prayers? all my life-long
Title:  fidelities?  Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work.  Steady! helmsman, steady.
Title:  Nay, nay!  Up helm again!  He turns to meet us!  Oh, his
Title:  unappeasable brow drives on towards one, whose duty tells him he
Title:  cannot depart.  My God, stand by me now!"
Title:  
Title:  "Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now
Title:  help Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here.  I grin at thee, thou
Title:  grinning whale!  Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but
Title:  Stubb's own unwinking eye?  And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon a
Title:  mattrass that is all too soft; would it were stuffed with brushwood!
Title:  I grin at thee, thou grinning whale!  Look ye, sun, moon, and stars!
Title:  I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost.
Title:  For all that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand
Title:  the cup!  Oh, oh! oh, oh! thou grinning whale, but there'll be plenty
Title:  of gulping soon!  Why fly ye not, O Ahab!  For me, off shoes and
Title:  jacket to it; let Stubb die in his drawers!  A most mouldy and over
Title:  salted death, though;--cherries! cherries! cherries!  Oh, Flask, for
Title:  one red cherry ere we die!"
Title:  
Title:  "Cherries?  I only wish that we were where they grow.  Oh, Stubb, I
Title:  hope my poor mother's drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers
Title:  will now come to her, for the voyage is up."
Title:  
Title:  From the ship's bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive;
Title:  hammers, bits of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained
Title:  in their hands, just as they had darted from their various
Title:  employments; all their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, which
Title:  from side to side strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent a
Title:  broad band of overspreading semicircular foam before him as he
Title:  rushed.  Retribution, swift vengeance, eternal malice were in his
Title:  whole aspect, and spite of all that mortal man could do, the solid
Title:  white buttress of his forehead smote the ship's starboard bow, till
Title:  men and timbers reeled.  Some fell flat upon their faces.  Like
Title:  dislodged trucks, the heads of the harpooneers aloft shook on their
Title:  bull-like necks.  Through the breach, they heard the waters pour, as
Title:  mountain torrents down a flume.
Title:  
Title:  "The ship!  The hearse!--the second hearse!" cried Ahab from the
Title:  boat; "its wood could only be American!"
Title:  
Title:  Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its
Title:  keel; but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far
Title:  off the other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab's boat, where, for
Title:  a time, he lay quiescent.
Title:  
Title:  "I turn my body from the sun.  What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thy
Title:  hammer.  Oh! ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked
Title:  keel; and only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm,
Title:  and Pole-pointed prow,--death-glorious ship! must ye then perish,
Title:  and without me?  Am I cut off from the last fond pride of meanest
Title:  shipwrecked captains?  Oh, lonely death on lonely life!  Oh, now I
Title:  feel my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief.  Ho, ho! from all
Title:  your furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole
Title:  foregone life, and top this one piled comber of my death!  Towards
Title:  thee I roll, thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last
Title:  I grapple with thee; from hell's heart I stab at thee; for hate's
Title:  sake I spit my last breath at thee.  Sink all coffins and all hearses
Title:  to one common pool! and since neither can be mine, let me then tow to
Title:  pieces, while still chasing thee, though tied to thee, thou damned
Title:  whale!  THUS, I give up the spear!"
Title:  
Title:  The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with
Title:  igniting velocity the line ran through the grooves;--ran foul.  Ahab
Title:  stooped to clear it; he did clear it; but the flying turn caught him
Title:  round the neck, and voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their
Title:  victim, he was shot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone.
Title:  Next instant, the heavy eye-splice in the rope's final end flew out
Title:  of the stark-empty tub, knocked down an oarsman, and smiting the sea,
Title:  disappeared in its depths.
Title:  
Title:  For an instant, the tranced boat's crew stood still; then turned.
Title:  "The ship?  Great God, where is the ship?"  Soon they through dim,
Title:  bewildering mediums saw her sidelong fading phantom, as in the
Title:  gaseous Fata Morgana; only the uppermost masts out of water; while
Title:  fixed by infatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once lofty
Title:  perches, the pagan harpooneers still maintained their sinking
Title:  lookouts on the sea.  And now, concentric circles seized the lone
Title:  boat itself, and all its crew, and each floating oar, and every
Title:  lance-pole, and spinning, animate and inanimate, all round and round
Title:  in one vortex, carried the smallest chip of the Pequod out of sight.
Title:  
Title:  But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over the
Title:  sunken head of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of
Title:  the erect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards of the
Title:  flag, which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the
Title:  destroying billows they almost touched;--at that instant, a red arm
Title:  and a hammer hovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the act
Title:  of nailing the flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar.  A
Title:  sky-hawk that tauntingly had followed the main-truck downwards from
Title:  its natural home among the stars, pecking at the flag, and
Title:  incommoding Tashtego there; this bird now chanced to intercept its
Title:  broad fluttering wing between the hammer and the wood; and
Title:  simultaneously feeling that etherial thrill, the submerged savage
Title:  beneath, in his death-gasp, kept his hammer frozen there; and so the
Title:  bird of heaven, with archangelic shrieks, and his imperial beak
Title:  thrust upwards, and his whole captive form folded in the flag of
Title:  Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like Satan, would not sink to
Title:  hell till she had dragged a living part of heaven along with her, and
Title:  helmeted herself with it.
Title:  
Title:  Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen
Title:  white surf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the
Title:  great shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years
Title:  ago.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  Epilogue
Title:  
Title:  "AND I ONLY AM ESCAPED ALONE TO TELL THEE"
Title:  Job.
Title:  
Title:  The drama's done.  Why then here does any one step forth?--Because
Title:  one did survive the wreck.
Title:  
Title:  It so chanced, that after the Parsee's disappearance, I was he whom
Title:  the Fates ordained to take the place of Ahab's bowsman, when that
Title:  bowsman assumed the vacant post; the same, who, when on the last day
Title:  the three men were tossed from out of the rocking boat, was dropped
Title:  astern.  So, floating on the margin of the ensuing scene, and in full
Title:  sight of it, when the halfspent suction of the sunk ship reached me,
Title:  I was then, but slowly, drawn towards the closing vortex.  When I
Title:  reached it, it had subsided to a creamy pool.  Round and round, then,
Title:  and ever contracting towards the button-like black bubble at the axis
Title:  of that slowly wheeling circle, like another Ixion I did revolve.
Title:  Till, gaining that vital centre, the black bubble upward burst; and
Title:  now, liberated by reason of its cunning spring, and, owing to its
Title:  great buoyancy, rising with great force, the coffin life-buoy shot
Title:  lengthwise from the sea, fell over, and floated by my side.  Buoyed
Title:  up by that coffin, for almost one whole day and night, I floated on a
Title:  soft and dirgelike main.  The unharming sharks, they glided by as if
Title:  with padlocks on their mouths; the savage sea-hawks sailed with
Title:  sheathed beaks.  On the second day, a sail drew near, nearer, and
Title:  picked me up at last.  It was the devious-cruising Rachel, that in
Title:  her retracing search after her missing children, only found another
Title:  orphan.
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  
Title:  End of this Project Gutenberg etext of Moby Dick, by Herman Melville
Title:  
